༄༅།།བོད་ཀྱི་ནང་བསྟན་དཔེ་ཚོགས་ལྟེ་གནས།།
Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center
Text Scan Input Form - Title Page
Work:
W1KG871
ImageGroup:
11KG1006
8186230580
LCCN:
n/a
ISBN:
Title:
Author:
witness to tibet's history
ཕུན་ཚོགས་དབང་རྒྱལ
phun tshogs dbang rgyal
Translated from Baba Phuntsok Wangyal's Mandarin Chinese manuscript by Tenzin Losel
Descriptor:
Original Publication:
n/a;n/a
Place:
Publisher:
new delhi, india
paljor publication
2007
Date:
Volume:
1
1 2
Total Volumes:
TBRC Pages:
Introductory Pages:
Text Pages:
n/a
n/a
Scanning Information:
Scanned at M/S Satluj Infotech Images, E-45, Sector 27 Noida, District Gautam Buddha
Nagar, U.P. 201301 via New Delhi, IN for the Tibetan Buddhist Resource Center, 150 17th
st., New York, NY 10011, U.S.A 2006. Comments: 2008



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
WITNESS TO
TIBET'S HISTORY
Tenzin Losel, Jane Perkins
Bhuchung D. Sonam, Tenzin Tsundue



First edition 2007
© Text: Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
© English translation: TibetWrites
www.tibetwrites.org
Translator: Tenzin Losel
Editor: Jane Perkins
Design & Production: Bhuchung D. Sonam
Project Coordinator: Tenzin Tsundue
© Photos on pages 12, 15, 16, 18, 21, 28, 30, 49, 92, 100:
The Tibet Museum, DIIR/CTA
All rights reserved
Published by
Paljor Publications Pvt.Ltd.
H-9 Jangpura Ext.
New Delhi, India
www.paljor publications.com
ISBN: 81-86230-58-0



Contents
Preface by Serta Tsultrim/vii
Foreword by Kasur Sonam Topgyal/xü
Translators' Note/xviii
In Memory of Comrade Tashi Wangchuk/1
First Letter to President Hu Jintao/55
Second Letter to President Hu Jintao/93
Third Letter to President Hu Jintao/101
A Short Biography /127



Preface
Y
Each memoir and historical account has its own
backdrop and they are written based upon this. For
instance, much of past Tibetan history was recorded
with religion as the backdrop. Likewise, most of the
literature in exile Tibet is written with politics as the
base. Because of the different backgrounds of writers,
the same accounts of history will have narrative
variations and their distinctive strengths.
Presently the case in point is In Memory of
Comrade Tashi Wangchuk - a long essay by
Phuntsok Wangyal which is seemingly written as a
tribute to Tashi Wangchuk. However, the real meaning
behind it is the narration of true historical events
surrounding the establishment of the Tibetan Authority
in Karze, Kham, in June 1936 with Getak Tulku of
Beri Monastery as its chairman, Jagoe Topden of Derge
as the foreign minister, Pomda Dorjee as the finance
minister, and Gonpo Tsering and Tashi Wangchuk as
chiefs of the armed force. Zhu De, the Commander-
in-Chief of the People's Liberation Army, was present
during the establishment of the Tibetan Authority. In
view of the Ten Principle Objectives, it's clear that the
newly-established the Tibetan Authority was an
independent entity with only a few modifications made
to its political system.
Today, though the Chinese Government distorts history
in various ways, the author has quoted the historical
evidence of the Ten Principle Objectives which were
published in Guo Ming Daily vol. 13, no. 41 and has hence



viii
proved truth from facts. Furthermore, Phuntsok Wangyal
writes, “The Tibetan Authority was established with
Getak Tulku as its head and a great number of broad-
minded, upper-class people as its main body. The Drichu
River was then the border between the Nationalist
Government and the Tibetan Kashag Government. The
Red Army passed through some ethnic Tibetan regions
to the east of the Drichu, but the region to the west of
the Drichu was under the control of the Tibetan Kashag
Government. So although establishing the Tibetan
Authority in this region had a purpose significance, it
initially referred to the ethnic Tibetan regions which were
under the control of warlords and the Nationalist
Government. Then it is necessary to define the Party's
Constitution regarding the nationalities' right to self-
determination. Some people who did not understand -
or did not know this principle – always tended to avoid
it, or arbitrarily misinterpret it, or distort its meaning by
adding something quite superfluous, obscuring the
historical facts including the principles regarding the
Tibetan Authority.”
Thus the main focus of this essay is to show the true
historical events regarding the establishment of The
Tibetan Authority as against many misrepresentations
and lies by the Chinese Government.
In September 2005 it was widely announced through
various media that the Chinese Government was about
to broadcast a 20-episode television series called Getak
Tulku on state-owned TV channels. The shooting and
editing of the documentary series had been completed
the previous year at a huge cost. However, the



ix
decision to telecast the series had to be withdrawn
when Phuntsok Wangyal published In Memory of
Comrade Tashi Wangchuk.
The 14 July 2005 issue of Lhasai Gongdoi Tsagpar (Lhasa
Evening Newspaper, issue 2617) carried an article titled
'Twenty-episode TV Series called "Getak Tulku' to be
shown on China-TV in September' which outlined the
contents of the series while narrating the life history of
one of the actors. The article mentions that “the filming
of Getak Tulku is the most suitable standard based on
which the contents of films regarding China's modern
Tibet can be controlled.” It can be inferred from the
most suitable standard based on which the contents of
films regarding China's modern Tibet can be controlled
that although the contents are a distortion of the true
history of Tibet, they must be 'controlled so as not to
cross the limits set by official Chinese propaganda.
Phuntsok Wangyal is someone who took part in - and
experienced - the actual events regarding the
establishment of the Tibetan Authority, and therefore
he knows the truth.
1
It is mentioned in ancient Tibetan historical
documents that Tibet - comprising of Ngari in the west,
U-Tsang Rushi in the centre and Dokham Gang-druk
in the east - share the same culture and traditions.
Furthermore, when the PLA's broad-minded Marshal
Chen Yi arrived in Lhasa he learned a great deal about
Tibet's situation and wrote that the whole of Tibet
should form a unified Tibetan nationality Autonomous
Region which would fulfill aspirations of the Tibetan



people, build a cordial relationship between the Chinese
and Tibetans, and also ensure the overall unity and stability
of the country. He wrote, “...a united autonomous region
of Tibetan nationalities be established, with Lhasa as its
capital, by uniting all the Eastern Tibetan regions that are
under the jurisdiction of neighbouring provinces like
Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan and Yunnan. But later, due to
"leftist influences over the entire policies of the nation,
this matter came to an end.”.
Because of the failure to implement this policy,
whenever the Chinese Government accuses His Holiness
the Dalai Lama and Tibetan Government-in-Exile, they
say that it is not possible to have genuine autonomy for
the whole of Tibet and blatantly lie that this never existed
in history. Yet, immediately after China occupied Tibet
Marshall Chen Yi had stated that the desire by the present
Tibetan Government-in-Exile to achieve genuine
national autonomy for Tibet was at that time not against
the Constitution. In fact, China was then prepared to
implement such a policy.
It is well known that Tashi Wangchuk was a Tibetan
who later went on to attain a high position in the
Chinese Government and was someone who had a
genuine love for Tibet. This fact is shown clearly in
Phuntsok Wangyal's chapter about him. However, the
main focus of the essay is to make known the historical
evidence regarding the establishment of the Tibetan
Authority in Karze and China's plan to turn the whole
of Tibet into an Autonomous Region according to
Marshal Chen Yi's suggestion.



I feel that the most important value of In Memory of
Comrade Tashi Wangchuk is that it records true
historical events at the time that Tibet was undergoing
cataclysmic changes, and it can now be a useful
document to refer to while Tibet and China struggle to
settle the political future of Tibet.
Serta Tsultrim
Editor, Tibet Express



xiii
Foreword
Phuntsok Wangyal (Phunwang) was born in Bathang
in Eastern Tibet. At that time Bathang and the adjoining
areas were administered by chieftains or kings and did
not come directly under the Tibetan Government in
Lhasa. Since Phuntsok Wangyal is a notorious Tibetan
in Tibet I had often heard about him. And based on
things I'd heard, I considered him to be the worst kind
of Tibetan who guided the Chinese Communist
occupation army into Tibet.
During a meeting in Dharamshala at the Kashag in 1979
to discuss the agenda of the Fact-Finding Delegation to
Tibet – attended by the cabinet ministers, Kungo Tara,
the then Secretary at the Private Office, the five delegates,
and Tenzin Wangdak, secretary to the Kashag Secretariat
- I suggested that since this was the first Tibetan
delegation going to Tibet in about twenty years it would
be appropriate to carry a letter and present for the
Panchen Rinpoche from His Holiness the Dalai Lama.
Kungo Tara said that since His Holiness was out of town
neither a letter nor a present could be arranged. I again
said that it was extremely important to have a present
for the Panchen Rinpoche in His Holiness's name.
Everyone agreed. However, Kungo Tara stated that it
would be awkward and a cause of differing opinions to
have a present only for the Panchen Rinpoche and not
for Ngapo Ngawang Jigme and Phuntsok Wangyal. I
debated whether it was necessary to treat Ngapo
Ngawang Jigme and Phunwang in the same manner as
the Panchen Rinpoche since the former was a traitor and



xiv
the latter the man who led the communist forces into
Tibet. “I don't know that,” said Kungo Tara, somewhat
disconcertedly. This was my opinion of Phunwang at
that time. And many others shared a similar view of him.
DISC
However, when I heard His Holiness refer positively
to Phunwang time and again in his speeches – and
especially when he said that he thought the problems in
Tibet would not get worse as long as Mao had trust in
Phunwang - I then thought that perhaps my opinion of
Phunwang was based on my narrow outlook and therefore
could be mistaken.
Later his daughter, Phuntsok Dekyi, who lived in
Germany, came to Dharamsala for the first time, and
when I met her she told me that Phunwang had been
imprisoned and tortured in the notorious Number One
Qincheng Prison in Beijing for eighteen years. He was
transported straight to Sichuan by train for further
detention immediately after his release. When his children
met him after almost two decades in prison, bubbly saliva
dripped continuously from the sides of his mouth and
his hearing was impaired. Phunwang later remarked that
the reason he suffered so much was because he was
accused of organising activities for Tibet's independence.
In reality, in the annals of Communist China's history,
Phunwang was a good patriot who helped plan, execute
and achieve their goals, and follow up on their policies
regarding Tibet's occupation and the signing of the so-
called Seventeen-Point Agreement. Once the Chinese
arrived in Lhasa, his contributions towards building an



XV
amiable relationship between the upper echelons,
ordinary Tibetans and the occupying Chinese forces were
incomparable. When China established the
Administrative Council to take control of the Tibetan
Government, he was the only Tibetan member in the
council among ten Chinese.
Whatever logic one may bring to bear, the fact that he
suffered eighteen years of imprisonment was simply
because he was a Tibetan. This was and is a result of the
Chinese policy of Han chauvinism.
The reason for Phunwang working so hard and
collaborating with the Communist Chinese was because
the hope that his associations with Russian and Indian
communists would help end the Manchu oppression and
bring about a genuine socialist revolution in Tibet had
proved futile. When the Russian and Indian communists
failed to provide assistance to materialise his dreams,
he landed at the doorstep of the Chinese Communists.
His genuine desire was to liberate Tibetan society from
its old and outdated social structure, with the help of
the Chinese Communists, and then establish a strong
modern Tibetan nation using the policy of self-
determination enshrined in Russia and China's
Communist Constitutions.
However, after the communists finally accomplished
their goal of unifying China – and when Phunwang had
contributed all his intelligence, hard work, and his youth
to helping the communists to gain power – he realised
that his ambition to liberate Tibet was absolutely



Xvi
misplaced. He learned that his only reward was eighteen
years of torture and imprisonment.
I met Phunwang a couple of times. The first was when
I accompanied Gyalo Dhondup- the then Prime Minister
of the Tibetan Government-in-Exile – to Beijing in 1983
and the second occasion was in Switzerland. In
Switzerland, my friend and a member of the exile Tibetan
parliament, Ngawang Gangzhontsang, invited me to raise
prayer flags on a high hill. Without my knowledge he
also invited Phunwang and his wife who were on holiday
in Switzerland. It was a surprising coincidence and yet a
very pleasant meeting.
Phunwang gave me an image of an imposing man
endowed with a strong physique and very good financial
resources. He also gave me the impression of a calm,
attractive, well-read and intelligent man with immense
love for Tibet and Tibetans and great respect and
veneration for His Holiness the Dalai Lama. At that time
I advised him that it would be a great loss if he failed to
leave a written account of his life and historical
experiences for future generations of Tibetans.
His letter of 4 April 2004 to Hu Jintao - President of
the People's Republic of China and General Secretary
of the Chinese Communist Party - is filled with
information to convey truth and his concerns. It is an
account by one of the oldest members of the
Communist Party, and someone who has witnessed the
sweep of history, showing the present Chinese leaders
the real truth based on historical events. It is also a



xvii
heartfelt account by someone who is driven by an
intense desire to do something beneficial. For example,
in this letter he clearly records the events of the 1959
Tibetan Uprising, the flight of His Holiness the Dalai
Lama and his government, followed by thousands of
Tibetan refugees. All this led to the existing Tibetan
problem and the internationalisation of the Tibetan
issue. He states that the divide-and-rule policy carried
out in Tibet was the saddest and worst policy blunder.
Furthermore, he mentions that while there may be minor
differences between the eastern Tibetan areas - merged
into Chinese provinces – and other Tibetan regions,
fundamentally they share the same culture and
traditions, and hence they should not have different
policies. Doing so may be the cause of a big mistake. It
was like this in the past and should be so in the future.
Other important issues he mentions in his letter are
“...the article The Dalai Lama is the Key to the Issue of
Tibet. Although I hold a view and standpoint that is
different from the writer, and don't totally agree with his
opinions, everybody clearly understands that for tens of
thousands of years Buddhism has penetrated and
reflected in all fields of the day-to-day life of Tibetan
society, particularly in the aspect of spirituality, which is
basically an objective reality that cannot be transformed
by human will.” and “... that the systematic position of
the successive Dalai Lamas is irreplaceable and a deep-
rooted influence in the hearts of the Tibetans, therefore
it is sacred and can never be blasphemed. Men, women,
children and the elders all have devout faith and worship
fervently, which is the absolute reason that Tibetans in



Xviii
COre
the Land of Snow are looking to the future. This Chinese
writer also suggests in his essay that the Tibetan problem
should be solved during the lifetime of the Dalai Lama,
and should not be delayed to avoid serious consequences
in the future. We should give this our maximum
attention.” Based on facts and realities that he
experienced, Phunwang sincerely and with great
optimism shows the Chinese leaders the correct path.
However, the Chinese leadership must have a genuine
intention and practical insights to consider these frank
suggestions and information. If the Chinese leadership
is skewed towards arrogant Han-centric views, then they
will never see the truth. It is very difficult for them to be
far-sighted and forward-thinking. And hence to place too
much hope in them is useless.
The Tibetan people – both inside and outside Tibet -
are proud of Phunwang for his courage, forthrightness,
fearlessness and his capacity to directly face the Chinese
leadership and to tell them the truth and realities from
his own experience and knowledge. We salute and thank
him. Finally, may His Holiness the Dalai Lama, the
temporal and spiritual leader of Tibet, live long and may
his noble endeavours never diminish.
IL
Sonam Topgyal
Former Prime Minister
Tibetan Government-in-Exile
Dharamshala, India



xix
Translators' Note
With the publication of A Tibetan Revolutionary in
2004 the tale of Phuntsok Wangyal's life by Dawai
Sherab (believed by some to be a pseudonym for
Phuntsok Wangyal) and two American academics,
suddenly a personality was born in international Tibet-
watching circles. Last year the book appeared in a
Tibetan translation. Although the narrative from
taped interviews gave a broad picture of Phuntsok
Wangyal's life, finer shades of his thinking were filtered
and the story was coloured by the ideological views
of one of the co-authors who enjoys a cordial
relationship with the PRC. Therefore the underlying
tensions, the motivations and intentions, which
propelled Phuntsok Wangyal and other early Tibetan
Communists, remained unclear.
Since then Phuntsok Wangyal has written three open
letters to President Hu Jintao and a series of other
related essays. We bring to you those three letters and
his essay In Memory of Comrade Tashi Wangchuk
who many historians portray as a bigger Tibetan
communist than Phuntsok Wangyal himself.
In translating his reportage, reminiscences and
political standpoints from Mandarin Chinese into
English, our effort has always been to give accurate
translations of his writings – even to the point of
adhering to sentence construction and style of
composition. The logic therein is that future
researchers and historians, searching for facts and
insights amid the morass of existing Beijing
propaganda, will find this book credible and of value.
С



XX
Phuntsok Wangyal is a historic Tibetan personality
who has been both a witness and an active participant
during the critical period leading to Tibet's loss of
independence. As one of the very few survivors from
that era, his insider's knowledge is of great historical
value. Reading his life story one is often troubled with
the question: Why does he continue to be in Beijing
and not speak out after seeing so much death and
destruction in his country under Communist China?
However, at his home in Beijing today, at eighty-five,
he now has the freedom to do anything but speak his
mind openly. So the truths in his writings are transmitted
anecdotally, clothed in socialist-Marxist officialese.
The main aim of initiating this translation is to bring
Baba Phuntsok Wangyal to English readers. In the
process of two years' of work – research and
translation - we put our best efforts into bringing you
an accurate translation. If the translation is inaccurate
or inappropriate, do write to us for improvements to
our second edition. Owing to our lack of expertise in
the history, dialectics and geography of that era, the
translation may have discrepancies. We ask readers to
bear with us.
Tenzin Losel, Jane Perkins
Bhuchung D. Sonam, Tenzin Tsundue
July 2007, Dharamshala



.
In Memory of Comrade
Tashi Wangchuk
In 1935 the Red Army was forced to carry out a
strategic withdrawal – outwardly due to the siege by
tens of thousands of Nationalist soldiers, and internally
due to “left-leaning” influences – which became the
legendary Long March of 25,000 miles. Then, at the
Zunyi Meeting the Chinese Communist Central Party,
with Mao Zedong at its head, rectified the misguided
stance of the "leftists” which averted the dangerous
situation in the Chinese Revolution.
The Chinese Revolution had been carried out under the
guiding principles of the “Third Communist
International”, according to the rules of which all the
communist parties around the world are bound to adhere
to the principle of a nationality's right to self-
determination. The Chinese Revolution had basically
respected this policy in terms of the nationalities issue.
The fourteenth point outlined in the constitution
promulgated at the First National Soviet Representative
Meeting, held in November 1931, stipulates: “The
Chinese Soviet authority recognises that all the
nationalities within its territory have the right to self-
determination until the time they separate from China
and establish a highly-independent state of their own.
Mongolian, Tibetan, Hui, Miao, Li, Gaoli etc, whoever
are within the territory of China, are entitled to the right



Witness to Tibet's History
to decide their own status – whether to join the Chinese
Soviet Federation, or to separate from it, or to establish
their own region.”
At the Maoergai Meeting held on 5 August 1935 during
the Long March, the decision passed by the Central
Political Bureau also states: “The fundamental policy of
the Chinese Communist and the Chinese Soviet Authority
on the minority issue is to unconditionally acknowledge
the nationalities' right of self-determination; politically
the right to freedom of independence from an oppressing
nationality, namely the Han nationality. The Chinese
Communist Party and the Chinese Soviet Authority
should actually support the movement for the liberation
and independence of minorities.” It further emphasised:
"All the Communist Party members must study the
nationalities theories of Marx, Lenin and Stalin, and
must carry out the Party's policy regarding the
nationalities issue.”
The Red Army fears not the trials of the Long March
Holding lightly ten thousand crags and torrents.
The Five Ridges meander like gentle ripples
And the majestic Wumeng rolls by globules of clay.
Warm the steep cliffs lapped by the waters of Jinsha
Cold the iron chains spanning the Dadu River.
Min Mountain's thousand li of snow joyfully crossed
The three armies march on, each face aglow.
This is one of the most famous poems composed by
Mao Zedong during The Long March. The references to
the Jinsha (Drichu) and Dadu rivers in the poem indicate
that the Red Army had entered Tibetan territory. The
territory to the east of the Dadu Bridge he mentions was
generally inhabited by Chinese, while the regions to the



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
1
asm
west were Tibetan. Not far from here is the famous
eastern Tibetan region of Dartsedo (Kangding].
In 1936, when the Red Army was marching across ethnic
Tibetan lands, He Long's troops passed through Derong,
Bathang, Baiyu, Derge and then reached Karze. In order
to avoid direct encounters with the Nationalist forces,
they often took the rugged mountain paths and short
cuts. They did not even enter the city on reaching Bathang,
instead circumnavigating via “Dunglong Mountain”.
In 1950, when I met with some leaders of the Southwest
Bureau in newly-liberated Chongqing, recalling their
circuit of Bathang, General He Long told me: “On the
map your Bathang looked like a big county, but when
viewed from atop the mountain in the east, which is
situated between two rivers and the monasteries, Bathang
looks like a grain of rice.” It is said that comrade Hu
Yaobang - who was then a "little red ghost” (a favoured
junior recruit) among He Long's troops – was in charge
of collecting crops from the villagers. But since the
country folk often tended to run and hide there was
always some cash left behind, or IOU notes with written
promises that the amount would be reimbursed when
the revolution achieved its victory.
The Red Army reached Karze, a strategic town in
northern Kham region. During that time, according
to the decision of the Party and the suggestion of
PLA Commander-in-Chief Zhu, the historically
significant “Bod.pa Authority” – namely the “Tibetan
Authority” – was established, which was astonishing
to the Nationalist Government, being something that
they had never thought of. Based on the records of



Witness to Tibet's History
that time, the Bod.pa (Tibetan) Yi De Wa (Authority)
had Ten Principle Objectives:
1. To overthrow the Chinese officials, warlords, British
and Japanese imperialists, and return to the Tibetan
Authority the gold mines, coal mines, land and
properties which had been confiscated.
2. For Tibetans to be independent, to establish an
independent Tibetan Authority, and the Tibetans to be
their own masters.
3. To establish an independent Tibetan army to protect
the independence of Tibet.
4. To distribute land to the Tibetan Authority, the land
then belonging to whoever it was distributed to; to allow
free trade; to value and reward water conservancy.
5. To abolish the class system, establish equality and
freedom for all; especially protect the young and
women.
6. To allow freedom of religion and the right to leave
the monkhood, and not confiscate land and properties
of the monasteries.
7. To liberate serfs, abolish the corvee labour system
and cancel all forms of exorbitant taxes and excessive
levies.
8. To develop animal husbandry and protect the
grazing lands to improve the lives of nomads.
9. To reduce taxes on crops, encourage commercial
enterprises and protect workers.
10. To unite with the Red Army and all the individuals
and groups supporting Tibetan independence.



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
After a very serious discussion and consultations with
all individuals and groups, Tulku Kalsang Tenzin, the
Fifth Getak Rinpoche of Karze monastery, was appointed
as chairman of the Tibetan Authority with some upper-
class elite taking charge of the various departments.
Shakya Thupten, one of the important figures from
“Derge Regional Kingdom” in northern Kham, was in
charge of diplomacy; Pangda Dorjee, a great businessman
BOX
Getak Tulku, who headed the Tibetan Authority.
-
_
_
_
from southern Kham, was assigned charge of commercial
matters; Gonbo Tsering (Hai Zheng Tao) and Tashi
Wangchuk, etc., were responsible for military affairs.
Although the Tibetan Authority was established under
special historical conditions while the Red Army was passing
through Karze in northern Kham, and was only short-lived,
in terms of China's nationality relations and problems with
Tibet, politically it planted a precious revolutionary seed of
nationality among the local people – especially among young
Tibetan intellectuals.
According to the Marxist viewpoint, treating a historical



Witness to Tibet's History
problem rationally can be considered historical
materialism. There is no abstract truth, the truth is always
concrete; and this concrete truth is decided or
transformed according to a certain time, location and its
condition. Without this precondition anything - be it true
or false – cannot be touched upon, even be commented
on. The Tibetan Authority and its guiding principles were
like that; it not only reflected that the Chinese
Communist Party – being a part of the communist
international - abided by the principles of the communist
international that stipulate the nationality's right to self-
determination, but also combined together the actual
situation of China's nationality issue as well as that of
the local Tibetans.
The Tibetan Authority was established with
Getak Tulku as its head and a great number of broad-
minded, upper-class people as its main body. The
Drichu River was then the border between the
Nationalist Government and the Tibetan Kashag,
Government. The Red Army passed through some
ethnic Tibetan regions to the east of the Drichu, but
the region to the west of the Drichu was under the
control of the Tibetan Kashag Government. So
although establishing the Tibetan Authority in this
region had a purpose significance, it initially referred
to the ethnic Tibetan regions which were under the
control of warlords and the Nationalist Government.
Then it is necessary to define the Party's Constitution
regarding the nationalities' right to self-determination.
Some people who did not understand - or did not know
this principle – always tended to avoid it, or arbitrarily
misinterpret it, or distort its meaning by adding



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
7
something quite superfluous, obscuring the historical
facts including the principles regarding the Tibetan
Authority.
The great thinker, Lenin, once profoundly declared:
“Whoever denies the nationalities' right to self-
determination is neither a socialist nor even a democrat.”
He further clarifies: “The nationalities' right to self-
determination is the highest guiding principle for
democrats under capitalism; and to the communists under
socialism, the concept is beneath discussion."
The Tibetan Authority, established according to such
principles, was therefore the offspring produced under
special historical conditions at that certain time and
location. Today, any criticisms against it, be it censure
or misinterpretation, are all baseless and unnecessary.
Moreover, the essence of the nationalities' right to self-
determination completely opposes the oppression of
nationalities, rather than unconditionally and blindly
advocating the nationalities' separation. This is the same
as objecting to an arranged marriage under the feudal
society and advocating the freedom of marriage.
However, doing so does not mean urging everybody to
get divorced. Therefore, the nationalities' right to self-
determination implies the right to self-rule, separation
and independence during a period of oppression, and
the right to maintain a nationality's federation and unity
during times of equality between nationalities.
In short, the nationality's right to self-determination
consists of – and combines – the rights to separation
and unity. It is exactly the same in relation to marriage
in which the right to the freedom to marry also
constitutes the right to divorce or not to get married. It



Witness to Tibet's History
is obvious that equating the nationalities' right to self-
determination to the right to separation, and yet never
even mentioning or daring to talk about it is a long-
standing error in political theory by those so-called
theorists. In other words, if there was fear of
nationalities separating, the key point is to politically,
culturally and economically enforce the principles of
the equality of nationalities (for example, not to replace
the nationality's language by Chinese in violation of
the Constitution and Law). This is the same as a man
who is afraid of his wife divorcing him needing to
overcome his male chauvinism. When we talk about
the historically short-lived Tibetan Authority, it is very
necessary to understand the explanation above.
Today it is undoubtedly right to advocate the unity of
nationalities, emphasising the federation of nationalities
and the national sovereignty of the State under the
historical conditions of New China, which has equality
among nationalities as its foundation. But doing so does
not mean that it was wrong to advocate self-rule for
nationalities, their freedom, separation and independence
under the historical conditions of a period of oppression
against nationalities.
Nowadays it is a pity when some so-called theorists on
nationalities issues, and some other concerned people, talk
over this matter with bias and emphasise and lump together
the different views produced under different historical
conditions, ignoring the varying preconditions in the
situation or not even employing a modicum of logic.
Influenced by such misconceptions, some of the so-
called historians, taking a counter-revolutionary stand,
eulogise the governors of the frontier (such as Butcher



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
Chao Erfeng) - and the counter-revolutionary warlords
who oppressed all the nationalities in the border regions
- as though they defended the national sovereignty and
its interests. At the same time, those revolutionaries who
oppose the oppression of nationalities – and the struggle
for the freedom and liberation of the nationalities – have
been disparaged as destroying the sovereignty of the
nation and its interests. These kinds of extremely
incorrect views and attitudes are astonishing. The
departments concerned should be aware of that.
History will not forget and must not forget. Talking
about the Tibetan Authority set up during the time of
the Red Army's Long March, what is worth mentioning
is that there was a group of promising youths from
Eastern Tibet's Karze and Aba regions participating in
the Anti-Japanese War during the Red Army's shift
northwards. Among those youths were Tashi Wangchuk,
Sangye Yeshi (Tianbao), Sala, Mengthai, Luode Gan,
Guo Rui, Yang Dongsheng, Wang Soucai, and Hu Zonglin
etc. They were the first group of Khampa youths from
the Land of Snow who joined the Red revolutionary
movement. We are proud of this.
Due to the rudimentary social conditions at that time,
they barely went to school. After joining the Red Army,
at the same time as carrying out revolutionary work
they also studied very hard, gradually becoming
extremely able nationality cadres with great political
consciousness and thinking.
In 1939, myself and Genchoe Tashi (from Labrang in
southern Gansu), Ngawang Kalsang (from Bathang in
southern Kham), Sherab (from Xining in Qinghai),
Magya Dhondup (from Lhasa) etc., were enrolled in



Witness to Tibet's History
the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission school
in Chongqing where we established the first “Tibetan
Communist Revolutionary Group” with a core of
around twenty students from the “Tibetan Students'
Union of Chongqing”.
In the name of our small party group, we once wrote a
letter saluting the great revolutionary leaders, Stalin and
Mao Zedong. Later, in Chongqing, we met with the
Russian communists, the Chinese communists and came
into contact with an Indian communist in Tibet.
Subsequently, those who joined the Party group included
Damdul (from Dege, northern Kham, who joined the
Red Army's Fourth Division and later stayed back in
Tibet), Topden and Tse-Choedak (from Bathang), Gonpo
Tsering (from Dechen in western Sichuan), etc. There
were also some other youths collaborating with the Party.
They were basically educated and learnt their Marxism
from books. In the Tibetan region, they voluntarily
organised Party groups and affiliated revolutionary
teams, and undertook the revolutionary activities of
democratic nationalists.
After the victory of the anti-Fascists in the Second
World War, and in view of the rapidly changing situation
both nationally and internationally, for ten years we
discontinued our revolutionary activities in Tibetan
regions which we had carried out undertaken
independently. In August 1949, after a discussion with
the Chinese Communist Western Sichuan Work
Committee, with some other people I decided to
transform the “Tibetan Communist Organisation” into
the “C.C.P. Kham-Tibet Frontier Work Committee”,
namely the “Bathang Underground Party” and its



Baba Phuntsok Il’angyal
affiliated organisation called “The Youth Alliance of
Eastern Tibet” with me as its head. Since then, tens of
thousands of Tibetan intellectuals and Party members
- such as Yanglin Dorjee, Tashi Tsering, Lobsang Tseten,
Gyaltsen Norbu, etc. – had one after another participated
in politics and the military, becoming the main pillars
among nationalist cadres of the liberation and
development of Tibet, and of setting up the
administration in western Kham.
During the very first period after the Liberation of Tibet,
I learned that there were a great number of people who
participated in the revolution before us – as I mentioned
before – during the Red Army's shift northward and in
the Anti-Japanese War. Among them were comrade Tashi
Wangchuk, Tianbao, etc. After knowing this we highly
respected and loved them.
Among those people, comrade Tianbao was the first
one I met. That was during the first days of January
1950 when the Bathang Underground Party got in
contact with the Chinese Communist Central Party; at
that time Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou were in
Moscow to sign the China-Soviet Friendship Treaty.
After having received a telegraphed order from
Commander-in-Chief Zhu from yet-to-be-liberated
Bathang, I went to Kangding in eastern Kham region
which had been liberated ten days before by the
Kangding division of the PLA's 16th Army led by Qi
Zhizhong, the division commander, and Miao Shufeng,
the political commissar. The fifty second advance
division of the 18th Army had also reached Kangding
and kept on heading to Karze and Derge the same day
to make camp. That night Wu Zhong, the division



LY
PENA
00012
PM
.
.
...
23
.
N
OM
.
-
-
w
Hi.
07
.
In 1949 it was the Southwest Military and Administrative Bureau of the People's Liberation Army
which ordered Phuntsok Ilangyal (front row, third from right) to accompuny its Eighteenth Army on
their murch into Tibet. He was already a member of their llilitary Committee and a committee member
of the Central Government's China-Tibet llork Committee.
U
commander, came to see me and I learned later that
comrade Tianbao was also with him. He asked me many
things regarding the situation in Tibet and its problems
so therefore I got little time to talk with Tianbao.
In Chongqing, after meeting with some leaders from
the Southwest Military and Administrative Bureau such
as Deng Xiaoping, Liu Bocheng, He Long and Wang Wei
Zhou, etc., according to the decision of the Southwest
Bureau I was appointed as a committee member of the
China-Tibet Work Committee, as well as a member of



Baba Phuntsok. It angyal
1
101
the Military Committee of the Southwest Bureau which
had jurisdiction over the five provinces of southwest
Sichuan, Kham, Yunnan, Guizhou and Tibet. On behalf
of the Southwest Bureau, Deng Xiaoping ordered me to
change places with comrade Tianbao and accompany the
eighteenth Army entering Tibet. Tianbao stayed back in
Kangding to supervise the setting up of administrative
work in the Kham region. In this way I got much more
chance to be in contact with comrades such as Tianbao
and Sala, etc. Although Tianbao and Sala had been
away from their country for ten years, since their
childhood, they could still speak an authentic regional
dialect with each other which was hardly understood
by other Tibetans.
1950, after the liberation of Chamdo, I held concurrent
positions as Vice-Secretary of the C.C.P. Chamdo Branch
Work Committee (Wang Qimei was Secretary of this
committee, Vice-Political Commissar of the eighteenth
Army and a committee member of the CCP Tibet Work
Committee), as well as being a Vice-Deputy Director of
the PLA's Chamdo Regional Military Committee of the
PRC, with Wang Qimei as the Director and Ngabo
Ngawang Jigme and Phagpa-la as l'ice-Directors. In
1951, having received orders from the Southwest Bureau,
I was to accompany the Tibetan Kashag Government's
delegates, headed by Ngabo, to Beijing. Penzhe, from
the State Nationalities Affairs Commission of the Central
Government, was in charge of interpreting. However,
because of the problem with his accent he was only
responsible for unofficial interpreting. Penzhe learnt his
Tibetan from Geshe Sherab Gyatso, and he told me
things about Tashi Wangchuk who was then in Qinghai.
1
1



14
litness to Tibet's History
Penzhe said: “The Qinghai United Front Department
asked Tashi Wangchuk to work on the great scholar Geshe
Sherab Gyatso, who used to be Vice-Chairman of the
Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission. One day
he visited the geshe's home and shouted loudly: "Where is
Sherab Gyatso?' The geshe, who was in the house, replied:
Who's that?' We told him it was Tashi. The geshe then
pointed very angrily at Tashi, saying: 'Kyoe tashi, tamash!'
(*Tashi means auspicious. You, Tashi, are not
auspicious'.) This epithet became commonplace for a
time in the region. Although Tashi Wangchuk – who used
to stay in inland China – initially used some greetings
which we Tibetans think are disrespectful, later after
conversing more they became very good friends.” It was
from conversations with Penzhe that I came to know
more about comrade Tashi Wangchuk.
Later on I learnt that comrade Tashi Wangchuk was
posted to Golok. He once led a group of prominent
people on a sightseeing tour of inland China. The whole
Amdo region was under the brutal control of warlord
Ma Pufang (a Hui national) before the Liberation.
The main leaders in the region had been defeated by
the Ma clan militia, one after another. Only Golok
remained as an "independent kingdom”. At the
beginning of September 1949, Ma Pufang and his son,
Ma Jiyuan, escaped from Xining and the PLA-liberated
Qinghai. A short while later a work group headed by
Tashi Wangchuk arrived and peacefully liberated the
Golok region. At that time there was a popular joke
spreading around the region. An upper-class local leader
asked Tashi very seriously: "Your Communist China
and our Golok, which is bigger”? Tashi Wangchuk was
WAS



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
later appointed as the first governor of the region and
effectively carried out all kinds of work, improving the
area's backward circumstances.
In 1954, the two great masters, Dalai and Panchen,
visited Beijing and attended the first National People's
Congress meeting, which was historically significant.
1446017:
R
itit
In 1954 the People's Republic of China held its first National
People's Congress in Beijing with the Fourteenth Dalai Lama and the
Tenth Panchen Lama as VIP guests. Mao Zedong rising to warmly
greet the Dalai Lama in the Congress' hall.
They also met with the leaders of the Central
Government such as Chairman Mao, comrade Liu,
Premier Zhou, Commander-in-Chief Zhu, Chen Yun and
comrade Deng Xiaoping, etc., and were later taken on a
sightseeing tour of the country. To accompany the Dalai
Lama the Central Government sent Liu Geping, Vice-
Director of the State Nationalities Affairs Commission
of the National People's Congress, Xu Danlu, who was



ll'itness to Tibet's History
in charge of Tibet work, and myself; Liu Chun, Vice-
Director of the State Nationalities Affairs Commission,
and Liang Xianxian from Tibet were assigned to
accompany the Panchen Lama.
.
..
..
.
-
During their visit to Beijing in 1954 the Dalai Lama and Panchen
Luma hosted the Chinese leadership to a Tibetan New Year banquet.
After the Dalai Lama demonstrated the offering of tossing a pinch of
tsampa in the air to honour the gods, Mao Zedong then threw a pinch
of tsampa to the floor "for the ghosts”.
S
The two great masters visited two famous monasteries
belonging to the Gelugpa sect - Labrang in southern
Gansu and Xining's Kumbum Monastery. Tens of
thousands of people from all regions of Amdo came for
head-touching blessings. The atmosphere was
unprecedented. There was such a huge crowd that a great
number of them were even trampled to death or injured.
Comrade Tashi Wangchuk was in charge of hosting
the two masters. The work was very demanding since
both were born in Qinghai, plus Kumbum Monastery in



Baba Phuntsok
angyal
Xining enjoys great secular prestige throughout Tibet being
the home of Tsongkhapa, famed founder of the Gelugpa
sect. Therefore, the visit of the two masters, and the
religious activities that were undertaken there in their
homeland, had an unusual feeling and special significance.
During that time I had more chances to talk with Tashi
Wangchuk and we came to know each other better..
Among the cadres working in Qinghai, he was the only
one who was from outside of the region and had joined
the Red Army and studied in Yenan. Such a cadre was
rare there. Moreover, he was a straightforward person
who dared to criticise and voice his opinions; therefore,
among the local cadres and people he wielded great
authority. Although his command of Tibetan and Chinese
was somewhat limited, owing to his heroic capacity for
work, and especially his qualifications and expertise,
everybody both feared and revered him.
In April 1956 the Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR]
Preparatory Committee was established. The Central
Government sent a large delegation headed by Marshal
Chen Yi to attend the ceremonies. The delegation
included the Central Nationalities Dance Group, Wuhan
Beijing Opera, Chongqing Circus and other invitees
numbering around eight hundred. The members of the
delegation also included the leaders from all the
democratic parties, plus representatives from respective
provinces, municipalities and regions. Among those
delegates were important people from Kham and Amdo
such as Tashi, Tianbao, etc.
I was the only Tibetan Communist Party member in the
Preparatory Committee, and had also studied at a Party
school. Therefore, on the recommendation of Wang Feng,



18
ll’itness to Tibet's History
the Deputy-Secretary of the State Nationalities Affairs
Commission, I was appointed as the special consultant
to Marshal Chen Yi. The delegation left from Beijing
and rested in Xining for several days to recuperate, and
then headed by car along the Qinghai-Tibet Highway,
passing through Golmud, Mu, Heihe to reach Lhasa.
Marshal Chen Yi wrote a poem on the way from which
two lines read:
“In Lhasa tomorrow we'll meet beloved friends
And like one family, Tibetans and Chinese
will talk with different feelings.”
.
Zhang Jingwu, head of the Tibet Work Committee in Lhasa (left),
the Dalai Lama, Vice-Premier Marshall Chen Yi and the Panchen
Lama applauding the announcement of the PCART's establishment
in April 1956.
Tashi, Tianbao and myself were all together; we met
everyday in the morning and evening, and attended all
kinds of celebratory activities. Although Tashi had some



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
19
contact with the Dalai Lama and his Kashag
Government, they did not talk much; but it was a
different story with the Panchen Lama and the officials
from his Council of Khenpos. They were old friends,
and wherever Tashi Wangchuk was, be it in Lhasa or
Shigatse, he would often visit the Panchen Lama and
they would enter into deep conversations.
Marshal Chen Yi was circumspect and far-sighted; after
understanding the overall situation he apparently engaged
in long-term strategic thinking. Once, in a speech at an
internal Party meeting of senior cadres, he proposed that
the Central Government should establish a United Tibet
Autonomous Region – with Lhasa as the capital and the
TAR as the main region - by including all the eastern
Tibetan territory which is under the jurisdiction of
Sichuan, Kham, Yunnan, Gansu and Qinghai. Doing so
would not only take the basic aspirations of the local
Tibetans into account, and benefit the development of
the Tibetan region, but would also be good for the unity
of the Tibetan and Chinese nationalities and the
sovereignty of the State. Marshal Chen Yi was outlining
these ideas while pointing at a map of China hanging on
the wall...that was an unforgettable talk. In addition to
the leaders from the Central Government and Chinese
officials from Tibet, there were other Tibetans including
me, Tianbao, Tashi and Yang Dongsheng.
This visionary plan proposed by Marshal Chen Yi not
only inspired and enlightened the Chinese cadres
attending the meeting, but was also encouraging and
exciting for Tibetan cadres like us. Travelling from
Beijing to Lhasa, I was often with Marshal Chen Yi,
answering all his questions regarding the problems of



20
Witness to Tibet's History
Tibetans. When Tashi, Tianbao and I talked about
Marshal Chen Yi, we all felt that he was like a Khampa
man - straightforward and frank. The level of his political
theory was high, and he was indeed a marshal who was
adept with both pen and sword.
When the delegation reached Xining it happened to
be the time that the secret report by Khruschev entirely
negating Stalin's policies had been relayed, which was
astonishing the Party cadres and shaking them. What is
unforgettable is that Marshal Chen Yi made a very
significant speech regarding this event. He said: “Even
teachers might make mistakes, but Stalin's contribution
is greater than his faults. As far as the anti-Fascist war
is concerned, under the leadership of Stalin the Soviet
Army – which was a major participant in World War
Two - bombarded Berlin under Marshal Zukoff's troops
and the German leader, Hitler, then committed suicide
in his bunker, leading to the end of the world war...”
Marshal Chen Yi's penetrating analysis was most
convincing. Everybody said: “Listening to a master's
talk is better than reading books for ten years."
In 1951, when the Central Government was negotiating
with Tibet, on the instructions of Premier Zhou and
Director Li Weihan I was temporarily appointed as the
political interpreter at the talks. There were many major
conflicts and even heated disputes between the Central
Government and the Tibetan Government on many
aspects of the discussions. However, they eventually
reached a mutual understanding and signed the famed
"Seventeen-Point Agreement”. At that time, Chairman
Mao made a simple and meaningful remark: “Today, we
are one family in New China, so the family matters can



Bain
Pluttia lliga
11
be solved through discussion." This remark had a great
guiding significance - not only at that time, but also in
the future - on our nation's nationalities work.
SU
.
.- - .1.
:
::
::.
WWW
..
.
As political interpreter und non-voting delegate, Baba Phuntsok
ll'angyal (standing, right) was witness to the negotiations in Beijing
leading to the signing of the Seventeen-Poini Agreement which
surrendered the independence of Tibet to the People's Republic of
China in 1951.
ZHUHE
11
1
/
you need
C
According to the spirit of the speech made by Marshal
Chen Yi about the greater Tibet. Autonomous Region,
the Central Government and the relevant departments
set up a work team, co-ordinated by the five provinces
of Tibet - Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan and Yunnan - under
the leadership of comrade Tianbao as its head and with
Zhang Chenwu from the lnited Front Department of
Sichuan as its secretarr. But later, due to the "eft
leaning” influences in national politics, the co-ordination
between the five provinces ended up with no result.
In 1957, after the National People's Representative
Meeting - with the approval of the Central
1
1
1
it
.
M
it
I
111c
}
A
t
1



Witness to Tibet's History
Government - the Nationalities Work Forum presided
over by the State Nationalities Affairs Commission
and the Nationalities Affairs Commission of the
National People's Conference was going to be held in
Qingdao. Before going to Qingdao, a mobilising
meeting held in Beijing at Huairen Hall in
Zhongnanhai was attended by all the representatives
and committee members of the minorities participating
in the National People's Representative Meeting and
National Political Consultative Conference. Wang
Feng, the Chairman as well as the Vice-Director of
the State Nationalities Affairs Commission, made a
speech calling on everybody to freely discuss the
issues involved in the nationalities work and relations.
And everybody was encouraged to voice their opinions
and criticisms with the declaration that “No one who
raises issues will be persecuted in future.”
At the Qingdao meeting, in response to the directive
by leaders of the State Nationalities Affairs Commission,
many representatives and committee members voiced
all kinds of criticisms and opinions, one after another.
Of those issues reported at the meeting, the main
concern that was highlighted was the common
phenomena seen in autonomous regions that “Chinese
were the masters of the minority family.” The second
issue was the distrust of minority cadres who, having
been given a post were never placed in an important
position. Many instances were given of this phenomenon.
The major suggestion was raised by the comrades from
Xinjiang. They proposed that the Central Government
should adopt a kind of Soviet-style system - to establish
an autonomous republic.



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
23
At the meeting, many representatives and committee
members actively took the floor, but Tianbao, Yang
Dongsheng and I did not make any speeches, and neither
did Ngabo and Kalsang Wangdu. Only Tashi Wangchuk
made a brief speech in Chinese with a strong accent,
which drew people's attention. I remember that he only
talked about some existing problems in nationalities work
that needed to be amended and given attention.
Premier Zhou summed up the meeting, giving an
important speech about the nationalities work and
relations; he also made some relevant explanations
regarding some specific problems. He did not criticise
the proposal raised by the comrades from Xinjiang,
but rather directly pointed out the reasons why it was
not suitable to adopt the Soviet-style system for our
nation. Premier Zhou said: “The Chinese nationality
structure and situation is different from that of the
Soviet, it is 'big decentralisation, small habitation'.
The actual situation regarding this problem is that in
olden times the Chinese ruling class, guided by a
counter-revolutionary policy of Han-chauvinism,
divided those minorities such as Tibetan, Li, Miao and
Tujia, etc. – which used to be geographically connected
to each other – into neighbouring provinces and
regions in order to divide-and-rule for easier
Sinocisation”.”
11
The Central Government paid great importance to the
Qingdao Nationality Work Forum. Premier Zhou made
a very significant political report and Chairman Mao
himself also met all the participants at the Qingdao
forum and had a photo taken for posterity. After the
forum all the representatives went back to their respective



Witness to Tibet's History
provinces and regions. Secretary Ngapo and his daughter,
Longrui, my wife and I, with our daughter and eldest
son, Pingkang, flew from Beijing to Xining via Xian.
At that time in Tibet, with the Tibetan Kashag
Government still in power, the Preparatory Committee
of TAR was a semi-authorised transitional government.
The Chairman was the Dalai Lama and the Vice-
Chairmen of the committee were the Panchen Lama and
Zhang Guohua. The board meeting was held once in
every three months. Generally the day-to-day work was
undertaken by a secretariat staff and decided by them.
Ngapo represented the Kashag Government as Chief
Secretary, Dzasa Lama Yeshi Topden represented the
Panchen's Khenpo Council as Vice-Secretary of the
Preparatory Committee, and I - as Vice-Deputy Director
of Chamdo Regional Liberation Committee - represented
the Chamdo region by concurrently serving as Vice-
Secretary of the Preparatory Committee and Deputy
Director of the Office of the Preparatory Committee
and all relevant departments. Therefore, Ngapo and I
had to return to Lhasa as soon as possible to prepare all
the general work of the Preparatory Committee.
The leaders of Qinghai Province showed great concern
for us. For the sake of our safety, after discussions a very
experienced pilot was sent by Northwest Military
Headquarters to fly us to Lhasa's Damshung Airport. Due
to the bad weather conditions that day the plane took
off several times but had to return from halfway, back
to Xining. One by one, those comrades who went back
to Lhasa by car had already reached there. But we waited
there in Xining for around twenty days.
XS



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
25
1
Meanwhile, comrade Tashi Wangchuk was in charge
of arranging our daily sightseeing and entertainment.
Once, at a small banquet organised by the Provincial
Committee, Tashi Wangchuk – looking at the director
of the Provincial Committee – whispered to me in
Tibetan: “This boss is very aggressive...” Later I learnt
that he was a very notorious “leftist" director whose
motto was “Eliminate the insurgency in its early
stages”, which is why, before the reforms, everybody
who was told to attend a meeting was then taken
hostage and forced to turn in the weapons they kept
secretly in their homes. How could Tibetans – who
are extremely fond of horses and guns - turn over such
items for which they'd paid large sums of money?
Besides, consultations were not properly held before
the reforms, therefore fighting broke out which
resulted in “pacifying the rebellion”.
After twenty days of waiting in Xining the plane finally
managed to land at Lhasa's Damshung Airport. An
accident nearly occurred when the plane lost balance,
due to the heavy snow piled up on one of its wings; it
lurched up and down with the pilot staring tensely at the
wings. The cabin door was shaking, making a huge noise,
and the luggage and fruit we'd brought were rolling around
everywhere. When the plane eventually landed, the pilot
was sweating profusely and said: “That was the most
dangerous situation I've ever faced”.
The change in the political weather was astonishing.
As I mentioned above, the person in charge of the
State Nationalities' Affairs Commission at the
Nationalities Work Forum, held in Qingdao, mobilised
all the participants to voice their opinions and



26
Witness to Tibet's History
guaranteed “no retributions”. But just a few months
later, as the situation shifted, all of a sudden he made
an 180-degree about turn. In the hall of the National
Political Consultative Committee he very vigorously
made a report on Anti-Local Nationalism and soon
after that intense Anti-Leftist and Anti-Local
Nationalism campaigns swept across the whole
country. Under such circumstances, where supposedly
not a single case of Han-chauvanism existed among
the Han nationality – who comprised ninety percent
of the total population – tens of thousands of so-
called local nationalists were seized from among the
fifty five minorities who occupied sixty five percent
of the total area but numbered only ten percent of
the population. Among those so-called local
nationalists, most were Communist Party and Youth
League members, progressive intellectuals and old
cadres from the 1920s and '30s - some of whom even
took part in the Long March.
At that time people commented: “Considering all kinds
of actual situations reported to the Qingdao meeting as
proof, if nationalism is to be rectified Han-chauvanism
should be the first thing to be rectified. But, just to the
contrary the minorities have been rectified, which is a
big distortion of right and wrong in terms of relations
between the nationalities. Moreover, if the nationalism
and nationalist thinking of a minority is to be rectified,
the upper echelons should be the first. Among the tens
of thousands of people who have been rectified, there
is almost no upper-class figure, which is also confusion
between right and wrong in terms of the class struggle.”



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
People who had joined the Red Army's move
northwards during the Anti-Japanese War were rare
among the Tibetans, but our comrade Tashi Wangchuk
was rectified and criticised, which led to his “three
dismissals, three remaining” – meaning his removal from
the posts as Representative to the Eighth National
People's Congress, Vice-Director of the Qinghai
Provincial Standing Committee and the Secretariat
Department, retaining only his titles as Representative
to the National People's Congress, Vice-Member of the
Qinghai Provincial Committee and Vice-Director of
Qinghai Province.
In the summer of 1958, after attending the National
People's Congress, I went to Chengdu to see two of my
children who were attending the 8-1 Kindergarten of
the Tibetan Army headquarters near Chengdu. After that,
when I was about to fly back to Lhasa I suddenly got a
call from Zhang Jingwu – the representative of the
Central Government in Tibet as well as General-Secretary
of the CCP Tibet Work Committee - ordering me to go
immediately to Beijing. After I arrived in Beijing, Zhang
told me: “There is probably going to be a change in your
work assignment; the Central Secretariat office will
inform you later..."
Myself, Zhang Jingwu and Tang Guansan were all
leaders in Tibet. After 1950 we worked together for
years and came to know each other and our relationship
was pretty good. During our spare time we would go
for walks together, play Chinese chess or games of
cards. It could be said that our relationship was intimate.
As I was the sole Tibetan member of the Tibet Work
Committee they treated me particularly well. But this



28
l'itness to Tibet's History
time, in Beijing, I could sense that their attitude was
somewhat uncomfortable. At that time the Anti-Local
Nationalism Campaign was on the upsurge across the
country and news of the minority cadres being criticised
was being circulated everywhere. Later I came to know.
that my political career had been secretly decided by
Fan Ming - Vice-Secretary of the Tibet Work Committee
and Director of the United Front Department - along
with Wang Feng, Vice-Secretary of the State
Nationalities' Affairs Commission.
WOWA
.
.
.
.
!
a
?
Isite
888
24
*
The Fourteenth Dalai Lama (seated) receiving a high-level Chinese
military delegation at the Norbulingka, Lhasa, in November 1951.
From left: Khenpo Ngawang Namgyal, Li Jue, l’ang Qimei, Zhang
Guohua, the Dalai Lama, Zhang Jingwu, Tan Guansan, Liu
Zhengguo, Baba Phuntsok Wangyal.
After ten daysd Zhang Jingwu told me to go to his home
for a meeting at which he would deliver the decision of
the Central Secretariat board. Zhang Guohua,



Babu Przepisck It isnghal
1201 att
#
of the military in Tibet as well as Vice Secretary of the
Tibet Work Committee was present, but Wang Feng did
not attend the meeting by taking sick leave, so Liu Chun,
Vice-Director of the l'nited Front Work Department, was
sent on his behalf. Zhang Jingwu said: “According to the
decision of the Central Committee, you are to be
transferred out of Tibet. The State Nationalities' Affairs
Commission will arrange your work, and while you are
working you should also undertake self examination of
your thinking.” I immediately asked: “What kind of self-
examination should I do, and what must I do this for?”
They looked at each other without a single word, and then
Zhang Jingwu said: “Well, it is said that last year, at the
Qingdao Meeting, you suggested dividing Derge county
into Chamdo region, so you should carefully engage in
self-examination over this case.” Then I explained right
away: “This is a big misunderstanding. This question was
raised at the meeting by Kalsang Wangdu of Derge. I also
gave an explanation and clarification regarding this
question, which was acknowledged by the team members
but was not passed. But Ngapo said that during the reforms
to be carried out in Derge, the Central Committee should
be more considerate to the leading Kagyud monastery in
this Tibetan region - Derge Palpung Monastery -- to which
the whole team agreed. While compiling the minutes, Ren
Ren, the note-taker and official of the Inited Front Work
Department, confused what had been passed with what
had not been passed during the team meeting
“On the following dav, Premier Zhou called myself
and Ngapo for a meeting to report on the ongoing work
of the Preparatory Committee for TAR. The first
question he asked was about the Derge case. Ifter
.
1



111
lliness 10. Tinc
llistory
T7
YTJ
listening to my report on what actually happeneci,
Premier Zhou said: 'Well, this is a mistake in the notes,
let's forget that.' Then we discussed some other problems.
Later, myself and Ngapo were invited to review the naval
fleet with him. You can ask Ngapo, Yang Dongsheng
and Kalsang Wangdu about the Derge case, so you can
understand the facts. Besides, this is not to divide (Dergel
into a foreign country!”
25
2
.
2.
.
.
.
of
**
.
1
PO
w
.
In his role as interpreter, Babu Pluntsok Hangyal is seated between the Dalai Lumu and the Panchen
Luma during a meeting of the State Council in Beijing in 1955 during which the decision was made to se!
up the Preparatory Committee for the Autonomous Region of Tibet. Front row: 27101 Enlai. Deilge
Xiaoping, Chen 17, the Dalai Lama, Phuntsok Ifungial, the Panchen Lamu. Second row: Z thing
Jingwu, Tan Guansan, Fan Ming, Ngapo Ngawang Jigme. Che Jigme.
{
LU
After listening to my explanation, Zhang Jingwu merely
uttered: “Ah, hah!” Then, because I insisted on asking if
there were any more questions, Zhang Guohua said:



Baba Phuntsok ll' angyal
“When the army was marching to Tibet in 1950, among
the books you brought was Lenin's On Nationalities' Right
of Self-determination; you should take this opportunity to
do a self-examination of your thinking!” I replied: "Is it
necessary to do a self-examination for reading a
revolutionary teacher's book?” When I turned to Liu
Chun he could say nothing. So, the things that would
decide my political career were the Derge case and the
book. However, since it had already been decided by
the leadership, and the Central Government had agreed
to it, I said nothing more thinking it would be useless.
Obviously, under the impetus of the nationwide Anti-
Local Nationalism Campaign, and the plan created by
these two secretaries - the General-Secretary and the
Vice-Secretary of Tibet - and the secretary of the State
Nationalities Affairs Commission, I was decisively
transferred out of Tibet. In this way I left the Land of
Snow where I had sacrificed my youth, working there
for almost twenty years.
The following day, since the Central Government agreed
to arrange for me to work at the State Nationalities'
Affairs Commission, I went to see comrade Wang Feng
with whom I had a good relationship. Although the
Director of the State Nationalities' Affairs Commission
was then Wu Lanfu, he was quite busy with his work in
the Mongolian Autonomous Region as Secretary and
Chairman, so the general work of the State Nationalities
Affairs Commission was carried out by Wang Feng. As
soon as we met, Wang Feng emphasised the significance
and urgency of the Anti-Local Nationalism Campaign.
He said, as if feeling very remorseful: “Even though
many comrades are having problems, those who need to



32
Il’itness to Tibet's History
be protected should be protected! This is in the interests
of the Party, and among senior Tibetan cadres are Tianbao
of western Kham, Tashi Wangchuk of Qinghai and you.
Tianbao is undergoing self-examination at the same time
as working, and so should you while you are working as a
Deputy-Director in the Ethnic Language Institute headed
by the former chairman of Xinjiang, Bao Erhan. The
problem with Tashi Wangchuk is more serious, but as a
result of my consultations with the Qinghai Provincial
Committee it's finally been decided as 'three dismissals,
three remains'. In spirit the Central Government is caring
for you three to pass over (this problem] ...” his words
implied that we were supposed to feel fortunate and
satisfied with such a decision.
In the summer of that year comrade Tashi Wangchuk
was in Beijing on an official trip and stayed at the Xin
Qiao Hotel behind Tong Ren Hospital. As soon as we
met, Tashi Wangchuk – feeling deeply grieved – talked
with me about his experiences of being criticised many
times in Qinghai and the results of the decision “three
dismissals, three remains”. And then, with great concern,
he asked me about my situation.
I told Tashi Wangchuk, whose fate was the same as
mine: “My misfortunes actually started from 1953. During
the early period of Liberation, the personnel in the force
marching to Tibet were mainly from the Southwest
Bureau of the eighteenth Army, headed by Zhang
Guohua, and its sub-divisions led by Fan Ming and his
men from the Northwest Bureau. There were great
conflicts over the focus of the work in Tibet among the
Party leaders. According to their reading of the Central
Government, the Southwest Bureau leaders thought the



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
CCT
and his Kashag - that had ruled Tibet for more than
three hundred years – would be the core of the work in
Tibet; on the contrary, the Northwest Bureau thought
that the Panchen Lamia and his labrang should be the
main focus of the work in Tibet.
“I was the only Tibetan out of seven committee
members in the Tibet Work Committee, and in the eyes
of Fan Ming I belonged to the Southwest Bureau. So
Fan Ming reported to the Central Government that as a
Tibetan communist I had once been in contact with the
Soviet communists, the Chinese communists and the
Indian communists as well. Fan Ming was trying to make
an issue about my Party origins being unclear and needing
to be examined.
“In 1953, I was purposely ordered to accompany a
Tibetan Buddhist delegation to Beijing, and they assigned
me work in the Legal and Political Department, trying to
keep me there. In 1954, the Dalai Lama and the Panchen
Lama attended the first National People's Congress
During the Tibetan New Year, at the banquet arranged
by these two lamas for the Central Party leaders,
Chairman Mao asked them about Phunwang going back
to Tibet to work and the two lamas agreed. Then Wang
Feng was told to allow me to go back to Tibet to work.
Nobody dared to oppose the word of Chairman Mao.
“Therefore, just one year after I was transferred out of
Tibet I was back again. Nevertheless, a few years later,
those people who were trying to plot against me were
again trying to do what they called 'luring the tiger out
of the mountain' by using the opportunity of the
nationwide Anti-Local Nationalism Campaign then



Witness to Tibet's History
wa
underway. Of course, I could not be called the 'tiger' as
the Tibetan region was then headed by the Dalai Lama
and his Kashag government, but some people who
wanted to remove this thorn in their flesh had devised a
cunning scheme against me. Using the method adopted
by the Central Government of ‘protecting to pass over',
they informed the Dalai and Panchen how I was to be
treated, and made a public announcement among all the
Tibetan cadres in the Party. I was not 'struggled'
[subjected to thamzing) at all, so outwardly things looked
calm and normal, but actually I was removed from all
the posts I held – even the post as representative to the
National People's Congress. Now I was merely an
ordinary communist undergoing self-examination, and
simply a Deputy Director of the State Nationalities
Research Institute - shifting my career from the political
field to academic circles.”
On hearing this, Tashi Wangchuk said very sorrowfully:
"How terrible! You are an outstanding intellectual among
the senior Tibetan cadres. What a pity!” That was my
last meeting with comrade Tashi Wangchuk before I was
jailed in solitary confinement in Qingchen Prison. The
struggles within the Party sometimes surpass battles with
the enemy; especially those comrades who put me in
limbo could still not set their minds at rest and went
further in trying to entirely eliminate me. Under the
excuse of “having very serious political problems, and
needing to be isolated for examination” they reported to
the Central Government and sent me into solitary
confinement in Qincheng Prison.
Here it is necessary to mention the problems regarding
Anti-Local Nationalism. In the case of the issue of



Baba Phuntsok I'angyal
35
nationalism, it is after all either a question of anti-Han-
chauvanism or it is Anti-Local Nationalism - these are
two different cardinal questions of right or wrong in terms
of the nationality issue.
Firstly, the revolutionary teacher Lenin said in his On
Nationalities' Right of Self-determination: “Communists
and socialists are all internationalists rather than
nationalists. Nationalism should differentiate the
nationalism of big nationalities from that of the
nationalism of small nationalities. The nationalism of
the big nationality is essentially aggressive and enslaving,
it is therefore unjust; but the nationalism of the small
nationality is basically defensive, it is therefore just.
Therefore the communist and the socialist must stand
on the side of the nationalism of the small nationality,
rather than contrarily on the side of the nationalism of
the big nationality. This is the fundamental question
between right and wrong in Marxism's standpoint on the
nationality issue.”
Chairman Mao points out in his On Correct Handling of
Internal Contradictions Among the People: “Today, Han-
chauvanism and Local Nationalism are the thinking
inherited from the old society; both of them are internal
contradictions among the people. These two ‘isms' must
be overcome or else it will do harm to the unity and
sovereignty of the State, but the key point is to overcome
Han-chauvanism.”
In 1954, comrade Liu Shaoqi said in his “Report on
the Draft of the Constitution of the People's Republic
of China”: “Influenced by the dominant counter-
revolutionary classes among the Han nationality in earlier
times – especially among the Han' cadres -- there is still
11
T
T
11
ITA
1111



36
Witness to Tibet's History
Han chauvanistic thinking. For example: Not respecting
the traditions and customs of the minority; not respecting
the minority's language; not acknowledging the minority's
right to freedom of religion and the right to self-govern;
not respecting the minority cadres in minority regions,
and never consulting with them over work; not believing
that the minority cadres have the ability to administrate
things independently, etc. It is undoubtedly the thinking
and attitudes of Han-chauvanism which will inevitably
destroy the unity of the nationalities, and is something
that should not be allowed under a country's regulations.
Han people and Han cadres should always pay attention
to overcoming their Han-chauvanist thinking. Of course,
the minority people also harbour thoughts of local
nationalism which equally need to be overcome, or else
it is not beneficial for their self-development.”
At the Qingdao meeting, Premier Zhou repeatedly
stated: “In history the Han ruling power did many
things which offended the minority – driving them to
mountainous areas and remote regions - and so we owe
them a lot. Today, we should treat the minority with
the attitude of paying back to them what we owe ...
also, the People's Liberation Army is an army which
protects the interests of the people, not like the army
used by the ruling power in olden times to suppress the
minorities... ”When comrade Deng Xiaoping was
working in the Southwest Bureau, he said in his “Report
on the Minority Issue of the Southwest”: “As long as
we carry out things according to the guiding principles,
and as long as we support them politically, economically
and culturally, abandoning Big Nationalism, we can
make the minorities abandon their parochial



Baba Phuntsok langyal
nationalism. This parochial nationalism comes from Big
Nationalism and is the direct reflection of Big
Nationalism. Today, if we are to ask the minorities to
abandon their parochial nationalism, we should first
honestly abandon our Big Nationalism. Once this Big
Nationalism is abandoned it is natural that we can make
them abandon their parochial nationalism. When both
‘isms' are abandoned, unity will prevail.”
The statements of Lenin, Mao Zedong, Liu Shaoqi,
Zhou Enlai and Deng Xiaoping- especially the teachings
of Lenin, that classic writer on Marxism - effectively
differentiate internationalism and nationalism, and the
two different qualities of nationalism itself, which is
Marxism's basic standpoint and view on the nationality
issue. These statements are therefore the dividing line
and the touchstone to distinguish the view between fake
and true Marxism and the standpoint between a fake
and a true communist.
“One can accomplish nothing without complying with
norms and rules”. To comment on the rights or wrongs
of any major statement, let alone that of political
movements, there must be a fundamental base to rely
on. The fundamental idea needs to be understood. This
became obvious whether it was right or wrong, in terms
of theory and fact, to carry out Anti-Leftist and Anti-
Local Nationalism Campaigns during the mid-1950s. So
it goes without saying by looking at the writings of
revolutionary teachers and leaders, and the reality of
ethnic relations. The Third Plenary Session of the
Eleventh CCP, in accordance to the principles of Seeking
Truth From Facts, reversed almost all of the unjust
verdicts issued during all kinds of campaigns created by



38
Witness to Tibet's History
the wrongdoings of left-leaning opportunists - including
the Anti-Leftism and Anti-Local Nationalism campaigns
- except for some exceptional cases.
In a flash it was May 1980, and under the care of Deng
Xiaoping, Chen Yun and Hu Yaobang, etc., the wrongly-
judged cases that I was accused of were reversed – not
only mine but also a great number of Tibetans in various
organisations once led by me were also rehabilitated
over their unjust cases. Before the rehabilitation, some
old comrades had once directly or indirectly spoken up
for me. It is said that comrade Tashi Wangchuk and Ya
Hanzhan also wrote a joint letter to the relevant
departments. Tashi Wangchuk was then the Deputy
Director of the Political and Legal Section of the State
Nationalities' Affairs Commission, and was about to
go back to Qinghai to work. When I was in Qincheng
Prison I heard that he was also rectified during the
Cultural Revolution, and sent for years to do forced
labour looking after sheep. When he was in Beijing,
Tashi Wangchuk and his wife, Zhou Shoufan, took care
of my children, both families having good relations and
visiting each other often.
In the early summer of 1980, General-Secretary Hu
Yaobang met me and the first words he said were: “It is
a great victory to see each other alive!” I recall that in
1950, in Chongqing, comrades Song Renchong, Chen
Geng, Hu Yaobang and I were members of the
Northwest Military Committee and we came to know
each other at a meeting. Comrade Hu Yaobang was then
director of the northwestern Sichuan prefecture; later
he was transferred to Beijing and became General-
Secretary of the Central Party League. Since I was the



Babu Phuntsok Wangyal
sole Tibetan member of the First Central Party League,
I had more opportunities to talk with him.
More than twenty years later, when General-Secretary
Hu Yaobang met me at the Central Party Secretariat, he
and Vice-Premier Wan Li were just back from an
inspection tour of Tibet. Under the leadership of the
Central Party, with Deng Xiaoping as its core, the
historically-significant “Document No. 31 on Tibet” was
formulated; subsequently the “Document No. 46 on
Xinjiang” was also promulgated. Although the policies
outlined in these two documents were not actually carried
out – due to influences and obstacles created within the
Party – they played a major role in bringing about a
solution to the nationalities issue for the Chinese
Communist Party, and they had a profound influence and
were highly praised by the minority cadres, especially
among those minority cadres who had more
understanding. These two documents significantly
suggest a concept that the Big Han Brothers treat all the
nationalities equally, and allow them to achieve the right
to gradually govern the internal affairs of their region
themselves. This is the actual embodiment of the
ideology on nationality within Marxism.
On many occasions comrade Hu Yaobang and I talked
extensively about matters relating to Tibet and
nationality work. I then put forward some opinions as
well - the opinions on the necessary corrections and
amendments regarding some serious mistakes existing
from policy to actual practical work. In summing up the
experiences and lessons learned in carrying out
nationalities work over these thirty years, I particularly
emphasised that if any problem arises in future – even



40
Witness to Tibet's History
in the case of insurrection – the army should never be
deployed. Because basically this would create a problem
in relations between the Han and Tibetan nationality,
therefore it would be better to settle the issue through
political means. The deployment of troops may be easy
and effective in the short term, but the wounds created
by so doing would never be healed. I remember comrade
Hu Yaobang talking about the problems with the
nationality cadres; he used very straightforward language,
saying “As a nationality cadre, one should speak up for
the rights of ones' own nationality; the nationality cadres
should not be completely subservient to the Chinese
cadres - doing so would make them lose the significance
and effectiveness of being nationality, cadres.”
Comrade Hu Yaobang also criticised by name some
nationality cadres who obeyed the Chinese cadres without
question, to which I replied: “There are also some frank
and honest cadres among the Tibetans who, for the sake
of the Party and people, have dared to speak up about
mistakes and shortcomings existing in the nationality
work. As a result they were criticised and rectified. But
the masses' eyes are bright and they hold justice in their
hearts. Those cadres - and the people who suffered while
protecting the interests of the nationalities - are highly
respected. Tashi Wangchuk of Qinghai is one of them.
It is said that in nomad houses in Qinghai, in addition to
hanging the portrait of Chairman Mao they also hung
portraits of Chairman Hua and Chairman Tashi
Wangchuk. Sometimes when people met with Tashi
Wangchuk they would perform full-length prostrations,
as if meeting a high lama.” After listening to this, comrade
Hu Yaobang very happily said: “Nationality comrades
like this are indeed good comrades”! In fact, everybody



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
41
who knew the reality realised that comrade Tashi
Wangchuk - whether in Qinghai or in Golok – was very
much loved and highly respected by the local people and
nationality cadres.
Tashi Wangchuk was also a close friend of the Tenth
Panchen Lama. During the 1980s, although the Panchen
Lama stayed in Beijing and while Tashi was in Qinghai,
whenever he came to Beijing Tashi frequently visited
the lama and they had heart-to-heart talks. Later he was
transferred from Qinghai to Beijing to be a member of
the Sixth and Seventh National People's Standing
Committee and a member of the State Nationalities'
Affairs Commission. At that time there were two
Tibetan Vice-Committee Members – the Panchen Lama
and Ngapo – and two Tibetan Committee Members,
Tashi and myself. I was one of the members of the
Fifth, Sixth and Seventh National People's Standing
Committee and Vice-Director of the State
Nationalities’ Affairs Commission of which Ngapo was
the Director. Therefore, we had many chances to be in
contact with each other. There were two old comrades
in the State Nationalities' Affairs Commission of the
National People's Congress – one was Guan Shanfu
(of the Manchu nationality) and the other was Tashi
Wangchuk. Both were very straightforward and frank,
daring to voice all kinds of opinions when discussing
nationality work and issues.
What comrade Tashi Wangchuk often emphasised at
relevant meetings was: “Let all the nationalities have a
home of their own, and let them be the masters of their
own home. As long as they have a home of their own –
whether it is as large as autonomous level, prefecture



Witness to Tibet's History
level or county level, or as small as autonomous district
level (because many minorities have widely-distributed
small populations) – no matter what the size of the
population, things would be very different. It is simply
human nature; when you have a home of you own, your
mind will be at ease.”
This concept outlined by Tashi Wangchuk to all of us
as “Let fifty five minorities each have a home of their
own, and genuinely be the master of their own home”
was simple and profound. Many Han comrades, being
Big Brothers, generally could not understand this or felt
annoyed by it. But for the minorities - especially for those
vulnerable minorities, for the homeless ones or those who
had a home but could not be the masters of their own
home – their understanding of this statement was largely
different from that of the Han comrades, for the powerful
Han could not put themselves into the shoes of others
to understand their feelings.
When comrade Deng Xiaoping was working at the
Southwest Bureau he made many important speeches
relating to nationality work. But later, after he started to
take on important work for the nation and the Party, he
made fewer speeches on nationality work. But “less
speech, more significance”. Concerning all the aspects
of nationality work, he once said a very meaningful and
key phrase which people often quote today: “To
genuinely implement a nationality autonomous region
...” This is a very important phrase. Anybody who has a
brain, especially those who think logically, can sense the
actual meaning behind this statement. In other words,
to "genuinely implement a nationality's autonomous
region" means that this has not been carried out or is yet
-.-
..--
-.
AME
.
2



Baba Phuntsok
angyal
1
to be carried out. If it had been carried out, it was
unnecessary to say so.
Why do I say that this is a key statement? Why is this
statement important? As long as we think objectively
and level-headedly, in accordance with the spirit of
equality between nationalities outlined in Marxism and
Leninism that promotes big protecting small, powerful
supporting vulnerable and majority caring for minority,
and in accordance to the principle of Seeking Truth
From Facts and the Central Party's spirit that
encourages everybody to be pragmatic, the basic
phenomenon of the nationality's regional autonomy
that ‘minorities hold the home while Chinese are the
masters’, these old problems have not yet been solved
- in some aspects and in some regions they are getting
more serious. And therefore this is what comrade
Xiaoping emphasised as the key point and the main
reason behind the policy of “genuinely implementing
autonomy in nationality regions”. As long as we carry
out things correctly, according to this directive made
by comrade Deng Xiaoping, the relationship
(politically, culturally and economically, including the
aspect of nationality language) between the Han
nationality and the fifty five minorities would be very
different, and could certainly be resolved. This would
therefore be beneficial for the construction and
harmony of the family of nationalities in socialist
society as emphasised by the Central Government.
Chairman Mao used to say: “When observing things,
we should learn to observe the essence of things rather
than the surface”. Today, on the question of nationalities
and their relations, the truth lies right here. “Good
1



44
Witness to Tibet's History
CCCS
medicine is bitter; good advice is jarring for the ears.” To
those who really care about the interests of the nation
and nationalities, and are thinking objectively and
sensibly, the statements above are the truth that sounds
unpleasant to the ears.
Everybody knew that comrade Tashi Wangchuk's work
in Qinghai had proven fruitful and highly effective. One
of his outstanding achievements was that after he wrote
a letter to comrade Deng Xiaoping, the Central
Government decided to correct the problem of
"pacifying rebellion” in Qinghai. With tears in his eyes,
Tashi sometimes reminisced with friends over things
that happened at the end of the '50s. Reform was
obviously good and necessary. But it had to be carried
out very carefully, or else it would have led to
unnecessary harm and loss. However, due to nationwide
“leftist" influences – and under the influence of
opportunism that encouraged "eliminating the
insurgency in its planning stage” – all kinds of extreme
methods were adopted such as issuing coercive orders
or usurping the position of others without consulting
them. Especially regarding the “pacification of
rebellion”, after some leaders of the State Nationalities'
Affairs Commission made an inspection tour of Labrang
in Qinghai, the original strategy of “winning over
politically as the main approach with military
encirclement as the secondary objective" became
"military encirclement as the main approach and
winning over politically as the secondary objective”.
Under the influence of these distorted principles and
policies many “villages devoid of humans” and “widow
villages” began to appear in Tibetan regions. In some



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
parts of Yushu many small boys dressed themselves in
sheepskins and hid among their flocks of sheep to avoid
being killed. The horrifying news of such barbaric acts
and wrong judgments left a deep wound in society.
Moreover, what made the Tibetans more heartbroken
was that some extreme “leftist” leaders deployed the
[Inner] Mongolian cavalry to carry out so-called “pacifying
rebellion”, causing hatred between Mongolians and
Tibetans and between Tibetans and Chinese. The
phenomena described in the Panchen Lama's “Seventy-
thousand Character [petition)” about indiscriminate
arrests, indiscriminate struggle sessions, indiscriminate
jailing and indiscriminate killing could be seen
everywhere. In the entire Tibetan region, thousands of
monks, nuns, lay people and almost all prominent figures
ten or twenty years.
Tashi Wangchuk often sighed, and in a voice deep with
grief said: “In the military trucks heading from Golok
and Yushu, thousands of men, women, children and the
elderly were trussed up and transported to Xining. When
they were unloaded at the gate of the prison some were
unconscious, some of them could not stand by
themselves, and some had even died already on the way.”
Those vivid memories of the past resulted in old comrade
Tashi Wangchuk being unable to remain calm and
accepting, which led to him appealing to the Qinghai
Provincial Committee for the wrongly-judged cases to
be rehabilitated after he returned to Qinghai. Many times
at certain meetings he spoke up for the suffering masses
while weeping bitter tears.
As mentioned above, later he wrote a letter to comrade
Deng Xiaoping and as a result almost all the misjudged



46
Witness to Tibet's History
cases were rehabilitated. Meanwhile many people had
already died in prison. The government issued brick tea
and khatak to the Tibetans who had been released, to
which the Tibetans - who believe in Buddhism – felt
satisfied and responded by shouting loudly: “Thank you!
Thank you! Thanks to the communist party! Thanks to
the government!" But those Chinese "rightists” – after
their cases were cleared – they themselves, or especially
their family members, often went to quarrel in loud voices
in the courtyards of the provincial committees and
administrations, demanding thousands of yuan in
compensation. This made the provincial leaders very
embarrassed and put them in a dilemma.
As to the rehabilitations – especially correcting the
problems existing in rehabilitating misjudged cases
and wrong verdicts – comrade Tashi Wangchuk made
the greatest contribution, which should be
recognised. The Tenth Panchen Lama also often
mentioned his contribution.
After comrade Tashi Wangchuk retired from work, with
some other comrades I often visited him and had heart-
to-heart talks. We were overcome with welling emotions
while remembering those eventful years. Recalling the
era of "Surpass England, Compete with America, Speed
Up Communist Society” and the period in which, by
using not only sticks but also guns, people were “driven
to heaven” – especially during that lawless ten-year
calamity – what we did was sinful and against the trend
of the times!
As far as the Tibetan region was concerned, all kinds
of centuries-old artifacts, precious woodblocks of



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
historical classics and scriptures, the heritage of Tibetan
Buddhism and thousands of monasteries that were once
the cultural centres of the Tibetans were all destroyed.
For instance, the magnificent Ganden Monastery, which
once housed seven thousand to eight thousand monks,
was reduced to ashes and the body of Tsongkhapa,
founder of the Gelugpa sect, that had been perfectly
preserved for more than five hundred years was
dismembered and scattered across the grasslands and
mountains. The luminescent pearl on the forehead of
Tsongkhapa also disappeared and its whereabouts is still
unknown today. It is said that there are four such pearls
in the world. One is on the crown of Britain's queen
one was owned by Empress Cixi, one is at the Taj Mahal
in the Indian empress's mausoleum, and one was on the
forehead of Tsongkhapa. It is also said that Tsongkhapa's
is the most brilliant of all.
Taking another example from the looted artifacts
belonging to Sakya Monastery, merely as far as the talipot
(pattra] scriptures are concerned, each leaf is worth a few
thousand dollars and a huge number of talipot scriptures
– each volume of which consists of twenty to thirty
leaves – were burned to boil water. Now the only two or
three volumes that are left are kept in the Beijing
Nationalities Cultural Palace. Moreover, a great number
of very precious thangkas were used for soling shoes. All
these hair-raising stories are beyond the imagination of
today's youth, but in the memories of those wrinkled
elders they remain fresh.
The Chinese Revolution - for which tens of
thousands of revolutionary soldiers had struggled,
contributing their lives and blood – gained its final



Wiiness to Tibet's History
victory after overcoming the blindness of “left-
leaning" opportunism and established the new People's
Republic of China. However, after the founding of
the nation the golden times lasted for only a few years;
the wrong-thinking of “leftist” opportunism got the
upper hand, nearly resulting in the fruit of
revolutionary victory coming to nought. Regarding this
period, comrade Deng Xiaoping very profoundly said:
“China has moved in a very incorrect way by following
the principles of class struggle. We should sum up
these experiences and think about the wounds brought
by the left to our nation, our Party, to our
nationalities and people, to our families and to our
descendants. It has done harm to the reputation of
our great Party and to a great extent destroyed the
building of the nation. Many good comrades and cadres
have suffered devastating blows. The nation has been
on the verge of collapse.”
Fortunately, after the Third Plenary Session of the
Eleventh CCP meeting, a policy was adopted to bring
order out of chaos and for thorough-going reforms.
The meeting completely negated these incorrect
directions, and with developing the economy as the
main focus in building the nation, reforms to "open
the gate to the outside” have been carried out. Since
that time onwards, the nation's undertakings have been
flourishing day-by-day in all fields and the progress is
attracting world attention.
In 1989 the Tenth Panchen Lama came to Shigatse to
attend a ceremony held at the Panchen Tashi Namgyal
cemetery to consecrate the remains of successive
Panchen Lamas. Tens of thousands of people from all



**
2004
:
.
.
-
:
The Tenih Panchen Lama made a speech at Shigatse in January 1989 – during the ceremony to inter
the remains of his previous bodies - in which he referred to the migh cost" Tibet hud suffered under
Chinese rule. Within days he died. Babu Phuntsok Wangyal, who had been a prisoner alongside the
Panchen Lama in Beijing, then decided to resign from politics.
man was there
made
of US FORMATION
CA
DD
EBOAR
D
OWOKWOOOOOWWW.00
di UERO NOWBOUW.
.. SAMOLADA 700 UrolooooOOOOOX
regions of Tibet attended the ceremony; the scene was
unprecedented. Hu Jintao, Party-Secretary of the Tibet
Autonomous Region, and leaders from the Central
Government, also attended. The Panchen Lama made a
very important statement during the ceremony, saying:
“In these forty years since the Liberation of Tibet great
progress has been seen in all fields. But, at the same time,
Y
(CT
T
!



.
50
Witness to Tibet's History
we have paid a heavy price...” That was the last speech
of the Panchen Lama before he passed away.
There is a well-known saying: “There is nothing more
sinful than forgetting”. For this reason, forgetting history
means a betrayal. But what is surprising is that certain
leaders – when they are eulogising the achievements of
today – forget the mistakes of yesterday and the heavy
price we have paid. They have completely forgotten the
twenty years of incorrect policies, especially the ten years
of calamities. Confusing right from wrong in the
nationalities work, especially the Tibet work, to suit
themselves they generally eulogise those entire past forty
years as a brilliant and glorious period. This kind of
viewpoint is a denial of the summaries made by comrade
Deng Xiaoping and the Panchen Lama in “Seeking Truth
From Facts” and objectively endorses the wrong-thinking
of the “leftist” approach. These remnants of the “leftists”
are still putting up a desperate resistance with their backs
to the wall, creating many disturbances and interventions,
particularly on religious issues among the nationalities.
People should be aware of this.
· History is forging ahead into the future. Young
comrade Tashi Wangchuk took part in establishing the
short-lived Tibetan Authority and gloriously joined the
Chinese Red Army. Although the Long March was a
strategic withdrawal during the Chinese Revolution, it
has historical significance and a practical result.
Chairman Mao summed this up very saliently; “Tibetans
also made their pwn contribution to this great Long
March.” Chairman Mao, Commander-in-Chief Zhu and
Assistant-Commander Liu Bocheng once said:
“Tibetans also once supported and saved the Red Army
A
.



Baba Phuntsok
angyal
with their yaks and tsampa - they also made a great
contribution to the Chinese Revolution”.
During the Anti-Japanese War, Tashi Wangchuk made
important contributions through his work in [Inner]
Mongolia. And after the founding of the nation, Tashi
Wangchuk's contributions in Golok and Qinghai are also
perfectly obvious and highly acclaimed. However,
everybody has shortcomings because “nobody is perfect
and no gold is a hundred percent pure”. Whether in
day-to-day life or in work, during the political career
of comrade Tashi Wangchuk unavoidably there were
things that should not have been stated or done – this
goes without saying:
Comrade Tashi Wangchuk was born on July 1 1913 in
what is known today as Xinlong County, Karze Tibetan
Autonomous Prefecture of Sichuan Province, and he
died on 16 October 2003 in Beijing. He was an
outstanding communist! A good son of the Snow Land
of Tibet! An unyielding Khampa! He will be remembered
forever in our hearts!
19 December 2005



Letters from
Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
to Hu Jintao
President of The People's
Republic of China
29 October 2004 to 1 August 2006



Respected General-Secretary Hu Jintao
My greetings!
At the time when you were selected as General Secre-
tary at the CCP's Sixteenth Congress I was in America
giving lectures; I sent my telegraphed message of con-
gratulations through the Chinese Embassy in New York.
Recently you were additionally voted Chairman of the
Military Committee, and for that I would like to express
my sincere congratulations! And I believe that under the
leadership of the Central Party Government, headed by
you, there will be great progress seen in all fields of the
nation's work!
In this letter regarding the Tibetan issue inherited from
the past – the issue relating to the Dalai Lama, his exiled
Tibetan Government and around a hundred thousand
Tibetan compatriots – may I take the liberty of
discussing some of my humble opinions with regard to
seeking an appropriate solution to the issue. First, allow
me to briefly introduce my biography.
During the recent nationwide celebration of the fifty
fifth “National Day" I too felt an upsurge of emotions.
I was recalling the time when we were joyfully raising
the five-star flag in Tibetan regions, the first national
flag of the People's Republic of China flying over the
Land of Snow'. A short while later, having received a
telegraphed order from Commander-in-Chief Zhu, I
went from yet-to-be-liberated western Kham to newly-
liberated Chongqing where I met with leaders of the
Southwest Bureau including comrades Deng Xiaoping,
Liu Bocheng, He Long and Wang Weizhou etc., and



Witness to Tibet's History
reported to them on the situation of the democratic
revolutionary activities taking place in Lhasa and other
Tibetan regions – including the revolutionary activities
jointly undertaken with the Chinese, Soviet and Indian
communists. Subsequently, comrade Xiaoping reported
on the situation in Tibet to the Central Government
and, with the approval of the Central Government, from
1950 onwards I was appointed as a member of the
Southwest Military Committee and of the Tibet Work
Committee. After the liberation of Charndo I held a
concurrent position as Vice-Secretary of the CCP
Chamdo Branch Work Committee; I also participated
in the talks between the Central Government and Tibet
and in the signing of the "Seventeen-Point Agreement”,
so I am a witness to history.
To commend my contribution during the Peaceful
Talks with Tibet, Chairman Mao himself presented a
copy of On Practice to me signed with his name?. Among
the five leaders of the People's Liberation Army's Lhasa
advance troop marching to Tibet, I was the only
Tibetan member; until 1958 I was the only Tibetan
among the eleven leaders of the CCP Tibet Work
Committee headed by Zhang Jingwu, the representative
of the Central Government in Tibet. Before the
founding of the People's Republic of China, I was the
main organiser of the “Tibetan Communist Campaign”,
the “United Federation of Tibetan People's Liberation”
(in Lhasa), the “Eastern Tibetan Autonomous
Federation” (in Dechen), and the “CCP Kham-Tibet
Border Work Committee”, namely the “Bathang
Underground Party” and the “Democratic Youth
Alliance of Eastern Tibet”.
ca



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
57
I once led hundreds of Tibetan communists and
members of those federated organisations to participate
in the politics and to join the army. Later most of them
became very high-ranking officials in the government.
Among those people there were six province-level cadres
(three vice-secretaries of the TAR, two of them above
province level), forty nine prefecture-level cadres, a
hundred and twenty county-level cadres and a great
number of ordinary cadres – they were then the core
nationality cadres who made a great contribution to the
liberty and construction of Tibet.
During the 1960s, influenced by “leftist” thinking,
history played a big joke on us. In the early days I was
once expelled by Jang Kaishi (Chiang Kai-shek), President
of the Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission
school; later, in Lhasa, in the name of the “United Tibet
Liberation Federation” I wrote a petition to the Tibetan
Kashag Government asking for the implementation of
democratic reforms in all fields of society, in terms of
reducing burdens on the people and carrying out a policy
to ensure democracy for the nationality. Since the armed
uprising led by the “Eastern Tibetan Autonomous
Federation” failed, I was put on a wanted list by the
Nationalist Government; later, due to me being a
“communist suspect” I was put under armed escort and
deported from Lhasa by the Kashag Government. In the
1960s I was framed by the people within our own
Communist Party and, under the excuse of “engaging in
the independence of Tibet” I was sent to solitary
confinement in Qincheng Number One political prison,
being physically and mentally tortured for eighteen years4.
In prison I overcame all kinds of difficulties, diligently



58
Witness to Tibet's History
studied the theory of Marxism - especially the philosophy
- and summarised my own theoretical system of new
analyses on dialectics.
After the Third Plenary Session of the CCP's Eleventh
National People's Congress, under the care of comrades
Deng Xiaoping, Chen Yun, Hu Yaobang and Feng
Wenbing etc., myself and the revolutionary organisations
I was responsible for were rehabilitated. Comrade
Xiaoping said: “You have suffered a lot! All the cases
against you were wrong!” After the rehabilitation I
worked in the National People's Congress, being a
representative to the First, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh
National People's Congress, and was a member of the
NPC Standing Committee and Vice-Deputy Director of
the State Nationalities Affairs Commission. Meanwhile,
I wrote three philosophical books of around a hundred
and sixty thousand characters which were highly
acknowledged by the experts and scholars in theoretical
circles in Beijing. After retiring in 1998 I was appointed
as a professor and Ph.D. advisor in the Undergraduate
Department of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences
and was engaged in all kinds of academic activities at
home and abroad.
It can be clearly seen from my biography that before
and after Liberation I was involved with all kinds of
revolutionary works and activities, in Tibet and some
other regions, for almost twenty years. During the 1940s
I introduced and spread the classic works of Marxism
and Maoism in Tibetan regions for the first time and
translated the revolutionary songs like The Internationale,
Song of the Volunteer Army (the National Anthem of today),
and Song of the Guerrillas into the Tibetan language. I also



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
59
also took the initiative to establish – for the first time -
the communist organisations in Lhasa and the rest of
the Tibetan regions. Therefore, I have been very much
concerned with the Tibetan issue throughout, for which
I accept an undeniable historical responsibility.
This year my biography from “interviews” by Professor
Melvyn Goldstein has been published in America. In the
Epilogue – when talking about Tibet's problems inherited
from the past – without any reservation I had quoted the
views in the article “The Dalai Lama is the key to the
Issue of Tibet” by a Chinese writer", and at the same time
I also discussed the issue that the politico-religious Tibetan
Kashag Government, which lasted for three hundred years,
should separate politics and religion to be in line with the
inevitable trends in social development.
I made a report to the leaders of the Central Government
and clarified matters relating to the “interviews”, hoping
that my opinions in pursuing a solution to the Tibetan
problem would be reported to the Central Government.
Being a person responsible for the very first communist
organisations in Tibet, for the sake of the Party, the
people and history, I felt it was necessary to officially
report to the Central Government as below.
In the “interviews”, or on all occasions, I have
throughout maintained the Marxist and communist
standpoint and views to express my opinions. According
to the theory and principles of the Party – and following
the fundamental spirit of the national Constitution and
laws of autonomy – my basic views are as follows: Today,
under the historical conditions of New China, it is more
beneficial for all the nationalities to remain united rather



60
Witness to Tibet's History
than seeking separation. Under the leadership of the
Chinese Communist Party, let's all be united, strictly
adhering to the precondition of “all the nationalities are
equal”, which is the base upon which the nation was
founded. The powerful Han Big Brothers should be far-
sighted and broad-minded, following the spirit of the
equality of nationalities outlined in Marxism-Leninism
that encourages big protecting small, powerful supporting
vulnerable and majority caring for minority, (they) should
completely overturn the counter-revolutionary policy of
Big Han Nationalism adopted by successive governments
in the Old China which, in order to achieve the purpose
of “Sinocisation”, divided the minority regions
administratively for better control – a “presumptuous
guest usurps the role of the host”.
Under the unified leadership of the Central
Government, and with the sincere help of the Han
populace, let all the fifty five minorities have a home
and genuinely be the masters of their own home, carry
out reforms and administrate the internal affairs within
the nationalities themselves. Let them stand up and "walk
on their own feet”, which is also what comrade Xiaoping
emphasised to "carry out a genuine regional autonomy".
We can then expect to make overall planning and give
consideration to the interests of all the nationalities and
of the State. Doing so, and by only doing so, we can
then appropriately solve the nationalities issue, especially
the Tibet issue. My views have consistently remained
unchanged and are well known to everybody within or
outside the Party, at home and abroad.
In order to solve the Tibetan issue, and for longterm
stability and sustainable development in the Tibetan
-



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
61
regions, and for sincere friendship and unity between
Tibetans and the Han nationality, “The Dalai Lama is
the Key to the Issue of Tibet” as suggested in the article
I mention above. Although I hold a view and standpoint
that is different from the writer, and don't totally agree
with his opinions, everybody clearly understands that for
tens of thousands of years Buddhism has penetrated and
reflected in all fields of the day-to-day life of Tibetan
society, particularly in the aspect of spirituality, which is
basically an objective reality that cannot be transformed
by human will.
Any kind of comments or attitudes that despise, or look
down on this deep-rooted and extraordinarily significant
ethnic culture, are irresponsible and derive from a view
of leftist opportunism that is divorced from reality. Such
kinds of comments and attitudes that are divorced from
reality, and against the principles, are quoted in the
relevant decisions of the Party and as comrade Xiaoping
said: “In the past - especially during the ten-year calamity
of the Cultural Revolution - this created a great mistake
in the Chinese revolution and its development, did great
harm to the reputation of the Party and brought the
nation to the edge of collapse. Therefore any kind of
opinions should be based on the actual situation -- seeking
truth from facts – this is the basic lesson to be learnt
from the experience. When looking at things we should
look at the essence of those things, and when making a
comment we should make it to the point.”
This Chinese writer has reasonably analysed and proven
from all aspects the theme of his essay, emphasising that
the systematic position of the successive Dalai Lamas is
irreplaceable and a deep-rooted influence in the hearts



62
Witness to Tibet's History
of the Tibetans, therefore it is sacred and can never be
blasphemed. Men, women, children and the elders all
have devout faith and worship fervently, which is the
absolute reason that Tibetans in the Land of Snow are
looking to the future. This Chinese writer also suggests
in his essay that the Tibetan problem should be solved
during the lifetime of the Dalai Lama, and should not be
delayed to avoid serious consequences in the future. We
should give this our maximum attention.
Influenced by the thinking of residual leftist
opportunism, people think that this topic is very
sensitive in society, especially in the Tibetan regions.
They are very cautious about it and drift along to save
themselves. This is something that people who fear
stirring up trouble feel they should avoid or dare not
talk about. But those people who have commonsense
view this topic as a key issue existing in the life of
society in the Tibetan regions, and strongly feel that
this cannot be delayed or even ignored.
Humans are blessed with the ability to know themselves.
As long as we level-headedly observe the national and
international situations, and sensibly think about
longterm strategies, any thinking about delaying the
Tibetan problem until the Dalai Lama passes away is
naïve, unreasonable, and even wrong tactics, which will
not only be useless to the interests of the State and
nationality, but also would result in consequences just
the opposite to what is intended. Take an example from
the reality of Taiwan - a lesson to be drawn from someone
else's mistake. If we could have solved that issue during
the time when Chiang Jingguo's Nationalist Government
was in power, we would not now be facing such troubles



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
63
with Chen Shui-bian's Democratic Progressive Party
calling for the independence of Taiwan. We should think
seriously about this, quoting it as a need for vigilance.
With regard to the Tibetan issue, comrade Xiaoping very
clearly said to Mr. Gyalo Dhondup, the second brother
of the Dalai Lama: "Anything can be discussed, except
independence”. Following the decision made by the
Central Party to fully negate the incorrect “leftist”
thinking - and according to the spirit suggested by Deng
Xiaoping - General-Secretary Hu Yaobang also very
firmly and clearly stated in regard to this historically
significant key issue: “The Lhasa incident of 1959 – we
have forgotten it; let's just look ahead and leave that”.
The successive leaders of the Central Party have followed
the spirit of Deng Xiaoping's statement. They ordered
the relevant departments to make contact with the Dalai
Lama's side for talks. Nevertheless, there is no progress
at all so far, the main reasons are the problems with
recognising the objective reality and the problems in
implementing the guiding spirit in practice.
Here it is necessary to point out that the experiences
and lessons learnt from history are very important. During
the 1950s, when Democratic Reforms were conducted
in the Tibetan regions, two different policies were
adopted for the same Tibetans - while reforms were not
to take place in the Tibet Autonomous Region for the
time being, this was considered necessary in the eastern
Tibetan regions including ten Tibetan Autonomous
Prefectures and two Tibetan Autonomous Counties, even
by using extreme means. As a result of that, fighting broke
out in the eastern Tibetan regions during the reforms,
and subsequently the fire of war swept across Tibet.
lomous



64
Witness to Tibet's History
Thousands of “Protectors of the Dharma” belonging to
the “Four Rivers, Six Ranges” group carried out an armed
resistance against the People's Liberation Army?, which
led to the unrest in Lhasa in 1959. The Kashag
Government headed by the Dalai Lama, with around a
hundred thousand Tibetans from all regions of Tibet,
fled abroad. That is where today's Tibetan issue stems
from; this is also the so-called “Tibet Problem” which
has been internationalised. At the same time it has been
proven that the policy of “Administrating Tibet” which
calls for a “divide-and-rule policy” is a mistake and
historically this is a bitter lesson.
Tibet (the Tibet Autonomous Region or TAR] is different
from eastern Tibetan regions that are under the jurisdiction
of neighbouring provinceså. But their social foundations,
their structures and their basic situations are the same -
identical. Therefore, there should be no difference in
implementing major political policies, or else we will be
committing a grave mistake. That was so in the past and
will be so again in the future. The Tibetans living in
Qinghai, Kham and on the Tibetan Plateau are a nationality
sharing the same language, traditions, economic structure,
common spiritual wellbeing and are geographically linked
and they have the same faith in the religion that has lasted
for thousands of years. And this is the fundamental
precondition and question concerning whether or not the
actual situation across Tibet can be understood, and
whether or not the so-called "policy of governing Tibet”
is right. In short, this is unquestionably where the key issue
lies in the case of whether or not to recognise and treat
the situation throughout Tibet with an attitude of seeking
truth from facts.



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
65
At the beginning of the 1980s, when the Central Party
leaders, including comrades Deng Xiaoping, Hu
Yaobang, Li Xiannian, Xi Zhongxun and Wu Lanfu were
talking with the delegation of Tibetan compatriots sent
by the Dalai Lama, they all acknowledged that there had
been great mistakes over the work in Tibet. When
General-Secretary Hu Yaobang and Vice-Premier Wan
Li were in Tibet on their inspection tour, they also openly
admitted: “There are great mistakes with the work in
Tibet; we must correct this”. After that the Central
Government issued the well-known “Document No 31
on Tibet” and “Document No 46 on Xinjiang” putting
forward the historically significant and vital views and
policies of Marxism regarding the nationalities work.
The core of the “Document 31” is about implementing
a genuine autonomous region and the right of self-rule;
handing over the right of self-rule to all the autonomous
regions including Tibet; the fact that there were too many
Han cadres who should be reduced; letting the Tibetans
have a home and be the masters of their own home; that
in future any official directives issued by the Central
Government should not be imposed uniformly in all
cases and followed without questioning; that those
[directives) which are not appropriate to the actual
situation in the nationalities regions must be reported
with requests to the higher authorities. After a request
has been endorsed, the right must be given to reject or
carry out the amendment.
In “Document 46” it is more clearly stipulated that the
Central Government retains only three rights in the future
- the right to defence, foreign affairs and some veto
powers. The rest of the matters are in the hands of the



66
Witness to Tibet's History
autonomous regions of Tibet, Xinjiang and Inner
Mongolia. Chinese cadres in Tibet and Xinjiang, etc.,
would function merely as “advisors” and “consultants”.
Chairman Mao, Liu Shaoqi and Premier Zhou
emphasised many times to the Dalai Lama and the
Panchen Lama that Chinese cadres entering Tibet are
"advisors” and “consultants” and they have to study the
Tibetan language, Han cadres must respect the
nationality cadres, and cadres from outside must respect
the local cadres. That is the key criterion in bettering
relations between Han cadres and nationality cadres, and
between cadres from outside and local cadres – these
are also the fundamental principles in handling
nationalities work... But, unfortunately, these great “31”
and “46 Documents”, which would have been very
beneficial to the Party, the nation and the people, have
not been implemented. The Dalai Lama also sent a
congratulatory telegram to General-Secretary Hu
Yaobang (at this time] which was the first message of
congratulations from the Dalai Lama to the Central Party
leaders since his exile.
At the end of the 1980s, for the first time the Dalai
Lama officially made a new proposal before the
European Parliament in Strasbourg, France - the main
content being the issue of autonomy for Tibet and other
parts of the Tibetan regions - which was opposed by
those who insist on the independence of Tibet, including
tulku Thubten Jigme Norbu, eldest brother of the Dalai
Lama, and many young Tibetan extremists. They wrote
a signed petition to oppose the Dalai Lama's advocacy
of autonomy, believing that this is betraying basic ethnic



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
67
interests. Some relevant departments from the side of
our nation were also suspicious of his “Middle Way
Approach”. At the same time, some Western anti-China
elements disapproved of this from the bottom of their
hearts. Not only did they not support it, but they also
objected to the Dalai Lama's endeavours to better
relations with China.
For a certain period the Dalai Lama was confronting
difficulties at home and abroad, facing a complicated
situation. However, the Dalai Lama insisted on the
feasibility and correctness of his “Middle Way
Approach”. Owing to his popularity and influence,
domestically and overseas, it was obviously clear to
everybody who understood the situation that although
there were differences of opinion the majority of the
Tibetans would ultimately comply with the call of the
Dalai Lama and listen to his advice. The cabinet of the
exile Tibetan Government endorsed a bill in 1997 to give
the Dalai Lama a mandate to decide the future of Tibet
without a general referendum.
Truth is not abstract, truth is always concrete, and this
concrete truth is transformed according to a certain time,
location and condition. In day-to-day life this concrete
truth is always defined by comparing the collective
strength between some kinds of subjective realities rather
than being decided by individual wills or some kind of
naive comments that are likely to be reasonable or not,
right or wrong. Everything should be based on reality
rather than illusion. That is a very important prerequisite.
Observers think that the Dalai Lama's “Middle Way
Approach” of “Not Seeking Independence but Genuine



68
Witness to Tibet's History
dr
Autonomy” shows – in the light of today's conditions -
a conscientious attitude and far-sighted thinking, giving
careful consideration to the fundamental interests of
Tibetan nationalities and their future.
The Dalai Lama has also expressed that his way of
thinking about the relations and historic status between
Mongolians, Manchurians, Han and Tibetans is an
academic question being looked into by historians. Today,
as to those people influencing society, what they should
mainly consider is how to discard thoughts of supremacy
by looking at examples in history and – with an attitude
of seeking truth from facts – face the reality rationally
and come to an appropriate solution to the issue.
In recent years the Dalai Lama's side has repeatedly
expressed that they are in accord with the Central
Government's points: 1. “To not engage in Tibetan
independence activities”; 2. “That Tibet is an inseparable
part of China”; 3. “That Taiwan is a part of China" [N.B.
The assertions in 2 and 3 by the author are not the
position of the Tibetan Government-in-Exile. Ed).
.
In addition to those three points, the Dalai Lama himself
has also stated time and again that his “Middle Way
Approach” is to “Never seek the independence of Tibet,
but genuine autonomy so as to preserve our own
civilisation, unique culture, religion, language, lifestyle
and carry them forward; what concerns me most is the
Tibetan people and the unique Buddhist cultural
heritage”. He has further emphasised that once a
democratic and united autonomous region of Tibetan
nationalities is established within the big family of New
China, he would dissolve the Dharamsala “exile Tibetan



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
69
Government” made up of representatives of the three
regions of Tibet, and he himself “being a simple monk,
will leave politics and concentrate on religious activities”.
In this way the old politico-religious system of the
Tibetan Kashag Government - headed by the Dalai
Lama – would officially declare an end to itself.
So it can be clearly seen that there is no essential
conflict on the fundamental points of view between the
Central Government and the Dalai Lama, therefore there
are no difficulties and obstacles in terms of solving the
issue. While the Central Government puts emphasis on
the sovereignty of the State, what the Dalai Lama is
asking for is genuine autonomy – both of which are
basically conforming to the spirit of the Constitution
and laws of autonomy.
The desire to have an united autonomous region of
Tibetan nationalities was expressed way back in the
1950s by Derge Kalsang Wangdu, leader of the Chamdo
delegation and Deputy-Director of the PLA Military
Committee for Chamdo region. During the Peaceful Talks
with Tibet, the Tibetan delegation also voiced the same
opinion to the Central Government, which the leaders
acknowledged in principle. In 1956, when the
Preparatory Committee for the Autonomous Region of
Tibet was established, Marshal Chen Yi, leader of the
Central Government delegation, Politburo member as
well as the Vice-Premier of the State Council, stated at
a senior cadre meeting in Lhasa: “It is alright to suggest
to the Central Government that an united autonomous
region of Tibetan nationalities be established, with Lhasa
as its capital, by uniting all the Eastern Tibetan regions



70
Witness to Tibet's History
that are under the jurisdiction of neighbouring provinces
like Qinghai, Gansu, Sichuan and Yunnan. That will be
beneficial for relations between Han and Tibetan
nationalities, the progress and development of the entire
Tibetan regions, and sovereignty of the State”. Marshal
Chen Yi's far-sighted and strategic thinking made a deep
impression on everyone.
Subsequently, in order to further discuss this matter,
the Central Government ordered comrade Sangyal Yishe
(Tianbao) to form a team to coordinate with the five
provinces over this matter. But later, due to "leftist”
influences over the entire policies of the nation, this
matter came to an end. In 1980, a group of Tibetan
cadres in Gansu's Gannan Autonomous Prefecture wrote
a petition to the Central Government hoping to establish
an United Autonomous Region of Tibetan Nationalities
- or an Eastern Tibet Autonomous Region like the TAR
- which would include all the ten Tibetan Autonomous
Prefectures and two Tibetan Autonomous Counties.
With regard to the question of establishing an United
Autonomous Region of Tibetan Nationalities, some
concerned people think that this is a point of view
suggested by overseas Tibetans, which is a big
misconception since such ideas had already been there.
Undoubtedly, people from all walks have had different
reactions regarding this question. The Tenth Panchen
Lama said at the founding of Tibet Aid Fund: “The desire
to demand an United Autonomous Region of Tibetan
Nationalities is fair, reasonable and legal; this is also in
line with the aspirations of the Tibetan people. The only
question is whether or not the conditions are in place
and ripe, but not at all a question of being so-called



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
71
TI
'backward and counter-revolutionary.” Many Tibetans,
including myself, expressed our agreement with this
statement made by the Panchen Lama.
As to the desire for an United Autonomous Region of
Tibetan Nationalities, and the level of autonomy -
including the nationalities' right to self-determination -
the question does not lie in their conception, form and
system, rather in the question of whether or not the
essential content is consistent or in line with reality and
to what extent. In a word, the question is above all
whether this can ensure the nationalities' right to
existence, and then the right to development which is
the core and fundamental question in terms of the
nationalities' issue. Speaking on the nationalities' right
to self-determination, it would be rather perfect for it to
contain a unity and harmony of content and form, but
rather than the circumstance in which there is only form
but no content, to a certain extent it is more important
to have content than form.
According to Marxist-Leninist principles of nationality
equality, and the fundamental law under which the right
to self-determination and self-rule is implemented, all
kinds of nationality policies with their own characteristics
are formulated by combining the actual situations of
respective nations. Under the leadership of Communist
China there are two kinds of autonomies – political
autonomy and administrative autonomy. Political
autonomy means that within a unified nation, and under
special historic conditions, the autonomous nationalities
have the right to separate from the state, like the
federated member countries and the federal republics in
the former Soviet Union and Yugoslavia. Administrative



Witness to Tibet's History
A
autonomy implies that within a unified nation the
autonomous nationalities don't have the right to separate.
The administrative autonomy can also be divided into
two parts – high-level and low-level. The high-level
administrative autonomy includes all kinds of ethnic
autonomous republics, such as those autonomous
republics in Russia; this level of administrative autonomy
can also comprise an ethnic special zone where, under
the premise of One China, a kind of high-level
administrative autonomy is being practiced, like in Hong
Kong, Macao and yet-to-be-united Taiwan.
After the founding of New China, according to the
Marxist-Leninist principles over nationality equality, self-
rule and self-determination, although an administrative
division system used in Old China had been inherited,
implementing a low-level ethnic regional autonomy
policy, this system fundamentally conforms to the
general condition of the nation. In order to perfect and
strengthen this policy, all kinds of discussions have been
undertaken by many educated people. In 1980, during
amendments to the constitution of the People's Republic
of China, I myself voiced some opinions -- just for
reference - on the amendment of the Constitution with
regard to the nationalities.
Early on, after the founding of the nation, the Central
Government signed the “Seventeen-Point Agreement”
with the Tibetan Kashag Government - the only treaty
signed among fifty five minority nationalities which
people say is kind of Hong Kong and Macao-style in
content and form: “One Nation, Two Systems.” The
politico-religious administration of the Tibetan Kashag
Government, that lasted for three hundred years, in



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
73
addition to having its own social structure including
politics, the economy, culture (including the
monasteries of all the lineages), military and diplomacy,
had also historically had established weights and
measures, a postal service and especially currency
minted by the Tibetan Government that circulated for
a long time (until 1959).
In Chamdo the Tibetan Government established a
governor whose office, the “Domey Chikyab”, means the
"governor of Amdo and western Kham”). The Tibetan
Kashag Government appointed ministers Lhalu and
Ngapo to be the last two governors there. The “Domey
Chikyab” was historically headquartered in Zhanhua
region (near Kangding in today's Karze Prefecture), but
later it was forced to shift as far back as Chamdo. During
the Peaceful Talks the Tibetan Government demanded
the return of all Eastern Kham regions.
Due to all kinds of reasons - historically, culturally and
geographically – all the autonomous regions in ethnic
Tibetan areas are not only geographically linked, but also
different from other ethnic nationality regions as far as
the population structure is concerned. So far, the ethnic
Tibetan nationality consisted of ninety percent of the
total population in the Tibetan autonomous regions,
which is different from the situation in other ethnic
regions. The Central Party leaders have correctly
indicated that the ethnic nationality regions are different
from Han regions; they have their own characteristics,
especially the Tibetan nationality regions. “For any
regulations there are exceptions, no principle is absolute”.
Therefore, as far as the ethnic regional autonomous
system is concerned, apart from the ground generalities
SCT



74
Witness to Tibet's History
1
there should also be a special form and structure with
regard to the actual situation. As mentioned above, as
to any kinds of form and structure with regard to
nationality autonomy, the key lies in the question of
whether the name and content are consistent. In a word,
the question above all is whether this kind of form and
structure can ensure the nationalities' right to existence
and then the right to development.
Today, under the premise of One China, Hong Kong,
Macao, as well as Taiwan, despite being the same ethnic
group as the Chinese, are granted a different kind of
autonomous system - namely “One Nation, Two
Systems; Hong Kong people govern Hong Kong with a
high degree of autonomy”. So therefore other brotherly
ethnic nationalities - especially the Tibetans who have
their own characteristic age-old ethnic cultural
traditions - deserve to be granted a more diversified
autonomous form and structure, and real content
corresponding with it. This should not be limited to
the same old system and unchanging form, for
"everything is consisted from diversity”.
It is quite normal for a government to have this or that
changes in its administrative division policy. As far as
China is concerned, before and especially after Liberation,
there have been many changes made in the administrative
division policy. For example, the Mongolian Autonomous
Region is made up of the three provinces Suiyuan, Rehe
and Chahar Er; the Western Kham regions were also
merged into Sichuan Province and newly-established
municipalities. “The theory is grey; the tree of life is green
forever”. Let us look ahead, liberate our thinking and
advance with the trends of the times. A famous theorist



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
75
COT
said: “Rotting of everything in the world is due to a good
reason”. If the thinking of Big Nationality Supremacy is
abandoned - especially the bias in the nationalities policy
that suggests “divide-and-rule”- then there would not
be any problems in changing and adjusting the
administrative division policy.
As far as how to solve the Tibetan issue is concerned,
since the fundamental nature of the question is absolutely
related with domestic matters, so under the premise
regarding the sovereignty of the nation it is merely a
demand for meaningful autonomy and slight changes in
the administrative division policy. In addition, as to the
essence and preconditions of this matter, every one of
us can and should reach a common understanding. With
this as a base, and after the Central Government and the
Dalai Lama have reached a mutual understanding on the
principles regarding national sovereignty, appropriate
adjustments to the domestic administrative division
policy, and implementing the right to self-determination,
both sides should officially declare in a political statement
that friendly relations between them have been restored.
Within such a friendly and harmonious environment,
regarding the concrete formations, plans, and schedules
for unifying the Tibetan autonomous regions – including
temporarily establishing a transitional consultative
department in order to assure the united autonomy of
its fundamental content and destination being achieved
- both sides should be strategic, far-sighted and generous,
adhering to the brotherly relationship. To quote a very
meaningful and straightforward statement by Chairman
Mao during the Peaceful Talks: “Today, we are one family,
and any family matters can be solved through



76
Witness to Tibet's History
e WC
re C
discussion.". These words – “Today, we are one family"
- of Chairman Mao are extremely important, not only at
that time but also today. This is where the key to the
entire issue lies. Anyone who does not quite understand
the profound meaning of this statement would in
principle be making a big mistake.
When it comes to a nation, stability is most important;
when it comes to nationalities, friendly relations are
important. Comrade Hu Jintao, you and comrade Jiang
Zemin have also repeatedly said: “The stability, security
and development of Tibet is very much related to that
of China". Tibetans, devoted Buddhists living in the Land
of Snow for thousands of years – especially those
educated Tibetans who have commonsense and influence
and a responsibility for society – are very much hoping
that the Central Government and the Dalai Lama
abandon past suspicions, take the overall situation into
consideration, and restore friendly relations as soon as
possible. This conforms to the common aspirations of
the people and is also beneficial for peace and tranquillity
in the entire Tibetan regions that occupy a quarter of
the extent of the nation, as well as for the tens and
thousands of devoted Han nationals who believe in
Buddhism. Moreover, this would help in reducing
meaningless obstacles and avoiding constant disturbances
in terms of international relations and diplomatic work;
it is also very important for promoting the image and
dignity of New China.
With regard to the current issue of Tibet, apart from
being far-sighted we should also consider the present
situation – not only taking stopgap measures but also
getting at the root of the problem. Whilst observing the



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
surface changes, potential controversies hidden deep
beneath should also be seriously looked into. For
example, the critical trend of Sinocisation in all aspects
of day-to-day life in society, especially the replacement
of the Tibetan language by the Chinese language - which
is in violation of the Constitution, laws and the principles
of language equality - and the decisive influence caused
by domineering attitudes in handling the nationality and
religious issue which has led to popular opposition.
We should no longer revel in self-glorification over so-
called “great earth-shaking achievements”, reporting only
the good news but not the bad. We should clear-headedly
realise that half a century has passed yet so far more
than ninety five percent of the financial resources of
Tibet have had to be maintained with aid from the
Central Government and other provinces – a violation
of economic rules for achieving a political goal – in terms
of expenditures in the national economy, the astonishing
long-lasting deficit situation, despite the allocation of a
huge amount of investment by the Central Government
in Tibet, cannot be sustained in normal situations, let
alone at times of emergency caused by factors at home
or abroad, the consequences of which are really
unimaginable. Therefore, a genuinely friendly and
harmonious nationality and economic policies and self-
sufficiency are fundamentally needed so as to break away
from “begging for help from the higher-ups” and a
situation that superficially looks stable. Some of the “Old
Tibet” [cadres from the early days) who used to be in
charge of important posts, firmly stated: “If the Central
Government does not change the Tibet policy it will be
useless to send senior officials to Tibet, no matter how



78
Witness to Tibet's History
big their ranks are. Tibet can no longer be sustained by
PRC currency and the gun”.
Life experience shows us that an excessive emphasis
being placed on one side will mask the extreme partiality
of the other side. In light of the political phenomenon
that "stability overrides all”, the horrible words “Free
Tibet” have become a "phobia” to some people for whom
even “Tibetans demanding to study the Tibetan language,
to use the Tibetan language, would lead to Tibetan
independence activities". On the other side, these words
have become a “money-earning tree" for some
departments to keep on asking for funds from the Central
Government, thereby setting an example for some
autonomous prefectures in inland China of how to
develop the knack for making money. There is even
· such a saying: “Inner Mongolia is asking for money, they
are denied; Xinjiang is asking for money, they are denied;
Tibet is not asking money, they are given”.
There is also another saying: "These people live on anti-
separatism, are promoted due to anti-separatism, and they
hit the jackpot by anti-separatism”. To summarise the
sayings above: “The longer the Dalai Lama keeps on
staying abroad, and the bigger his influence, the more
long-lasting the period of high ranks and great wealth
for those anti-separatist groups; on the contrary, when
the Dalai Lama restores relations with the Central
Government, these people will be terrified, tense and
lose their jobs”. The statement above is not at all far-
fetched. With regard to the question of whether or not
relations between the Central Government and the Dalai
Lama can be restored, this is not only related to shifts of



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
political partiality, resistance and even open objections
within the nation, but also to the reactions of such and
such people and groups and the advantages and
disadvantages to them in terms of economic interests.
In short, we must consider all sides with clear heads,
trying to avoid a biased way of thinking, seeing through
all the controversies - whether overt or covert – thinking
deeply, knowing each other and making a firm decision
to solve this key issue facing us, namely the Tibetan issue
inherited from the past. This is a question of whether or
not it is good for the Dalai Lama to remain abroad or
come back to the nation. In regard to this very significant
question, many outstanding and educated people think
it is better for him to come back. After the Dalai Lama
has returned to the nation, the essence of the issue would
be significantly transformed into a domestic matter, an
internal controversy. Although certain problems may
occur, after all these will be minor problems that can be
solved and can be amicably solved. Moreover, after the
Dalai Lama with his heart of compassion comes back to
the nation, all the Tibetans who believe in Buddhism
would set their minds at peace instead of being in
emotional conflict, so the worries would be baseless.
Throughout the history of humanity, in societies where
there is freedom of religion and a great religious leader,
there is peace, stability, and a healthy environment. In
other words, if the Dalai Lama and his exile government
keep on staying abroad, the issue remains an international
diplomatic matter, a kind of external controversy creating
antagonism. Amid the complexity of international
relations and the fluid situation, possible disturbances



80
Witness to Tibet's History
and difficulties cannot be predicted. For example: the
United Nations General Assembly has adopted
resolutions three times on the Tibet issue, placing Tibet
in the category with the right of self-determination; for
another example, the decision to allow the Dalai Lama
to visit the United States of America is unanimously
passed every time by the Senate and the House of
Representatives; when the Dalai Lama goes on overseas
visits he is received with state honours and, what is more,
in 1997 the State Assembly of Berkeley, California,
passed a resolution to "sanction all those cities which
have business relations with Tibet while it is under
occupation by China”; the US State Department specially
established a Tibetan affairs section which is now
elevated from bureau level to commission level, and even
requested permission to set up an office in Lhasa.
Furthermore, the European Union and the Western
media always tend to take the side of Tibet in terms of
making decisions, passing bills and engaging in
discussions over the Tibet issue, and the Fourth
International Tibet Support Group Meeting was held in
Prague, the capital of Czechoslovakia, etc. As to all
these interferences mentioned above, our nation's foreign
affairs department has tried all means to dissuade these
countries from doing so, expressing dissatisfaction and
even lodging protests. But our counterparts still stick to
their own ways, and dissemble.
Some of the Tibetan compatriots who have come back
to the nation to visit relatives very seriously said to
relevant people from our side: “Your propaganda says
that the Dalai Lama is an anti-China instrument used by



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
81
the West and is the root cause of instability and rioting
in Lhasa and other Tibetan regions. On the one side you
declare that your policy of winning over the Dalai Lama
remains unchanged, but on the other hand your
propaganda is wilfully generating personal attacks on the
Dalai Lama and deliberately underestimating, or even
denying, his political status, popularity and influence.
Such a way of talking is baseless, unreal and completely
incorrect. In reality your views are widely divergent. But
once the Dalai Lama passes away the situation - being
swept along on a tide of tempting opportunities and the
trends of the time - will be uncertain”.
Regarding the question of social stability, they have also
said: “Everybody knows that the Dalai Lama has
supreme faith, an outstanding personality, and he is a
simple monk, a Nobel Peace laureate, a devoted Buddhist
who insists on non-violence and has no selfish
considerations and is always concerned for others. He
has consistently been against riots and violence in any
form or name, thinking that is as stupid as “throwing
eggs against rocks’, so the situation is apparently stable
due to his control and influence. But once he passes away
everything will be uncertain. The situation could be out
of control. Those young people who have been
advocating resistance - especially those Khampas and
Amdowas who are martial in spirit – will carry out all
kinds of extreme actions”. That's why even the
successive counter-revolutionary governments have
learnt the lesson that “to govern Tibet, one should first
bring peace and stability to Kham” which definitely
shows their fear of the spirit of resistance in Amdowas,
and especially in Khampas.
1



Witness to Tibet's History
As to the personality of the Dalai Lama, his political
prestige and influence surpasses that of the previous
Dalai Lamas. He is praised as the Living Buddha in the
world today, one of the global religious leaders, and is
highly respected and worshipped by people around the
world. Merely taking an example from his two visits to
Taiwan, all the political parties, religious groups and
people from all walks of life turned out in full force -
there were tens of thousands of people, men, women,
the elderly and children, turning out to see the Dalai Lama
and receive his blessing. The scene was unprecedented.
People said something like this: “No wonder the Central
Government wants the Dalai Lama to acknowledge that
Taiwan is a part of China”.
As I mentioned above, after the Dalai Lama returns to
the nation the internationalised “Tibet Problem” will
transform into a non-antagonistic internal nationality issue
– simply a domestic controversy, to a certain extent. So
why be concerned, since the Dalai Lama has repeatedly
stated that after returning to the nation he would leave
politics and concentrate on religious activities, and that
the Central Government does not have to bother about
the arrangement of his political position?
Therefore, it is obviously clear that the resolution of the
Tibet issue inherited from the past is essentially to place
the domestic natio.vality issue back in its previous position,
and a question of distinguishing the nature of the issue.
In short, we should be very careful in the decision-making
and should not – following the narrow-minded views and
bias of some people – ignore the advice of people who
are very much concerned about the nation, and should
Ut



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
83
not turn away from the small difficulties of today, leaving
the major difficulties 'til tomorrow.
All in all, as long as the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader
of devoted Tibetan Buddhists, the one who is the
cohesive force for the Tibetan religion, can return to
the nation, from a standpoint of overall relations and
their trends we can then “bring in peace and stability at
home and abroad”. The return of the Dalai Lama would
not only have an energising influence on all aspects of
the nation, but also from the political point of view,
the so called “Tibet Problem”, namely the
internationalised “Tibet Fever”, would naturally quieten
down. Today Tibetan Buddhism – that is seen as a
psychological science and non-theistic worldview – is
flourishing, spreading in many countries with lots of
followers, especially among intellectual circles, and has
an increasing influence in the day-to-day social life. So
the return of the Dalai Lama, one of the most influential
persons in the world, would bring with it the hearts of
the people, particularly of the tens of thousands of
Tibetans who have risked their lives to escape abroad
to see him – including the Seventeeth Karmapa, who
escaped to India a few years ago to meet him, and Agya
Rinpoche, the abbot of Kumbum Monastery, who met
the Dalai Lama after fleeing to America. So those people
will no longer have to risk their lives to escape abroad
to see the Dalai Lama, and also the support of the
people abroad will be on the side of the nation.
The Tibet issue is the most important of all the nation's
nationalities issues; if that issue could be satisfactorily
solved it would not only influence the future of the
Tibetan nationality itself, but also, at the same time -



Witness to Tibet's History
according to the regulations of the constitution and
laws of autonomy - this is very much related to
improving and implementing the rights to autonomous
regions for other brotherly nationalities. All of this is
undoubtedly a turning point in international strategy;
the consequences due to the spirit of "peaceful co-
existence” are definitely dynamic.
Truth is ordinary, but the ordinary truth tends to be
ignored by people, which sooner or later will be
punished by history. After the Peaceful Liberation of
Tibet, Chairman Mao repeatedly warned the Han cadres
entering Tibet saying: “When you are in Tibet, whatever
you are doing, don't forget two very important matters,
religion and nationality, and be extraordinarily careful
in handling these two matters”. And Chairman Mao
emphatically urged General Zhang Guohua, commander
of the Eighteenth Army: “When you meet the Dalai Lama
in Lhasa, you should kowtow to him to show your respect”.
Seeing an expression of unwillingness on Zhang
Guohua's face, Chairman Mao said strictly: "Comrade
Zhang Guohua, you can spill your blood for revolution,
so can't you do a kowtow for revolution!”
However, later peoples' brains got overheated and, in
the political environment of “more the leftist fervour,
greater the revolution”, everybody from top to bottom
betrayed these two important matters, which resulted in
the twenty years of wrong thinking that everyone is aware
of. Therefore, in the nationality regions – especially in
the Tibetan nationality regions – whether or not the
religious and nationality issue can be appropriately solved
is the key that determines whether or not the entire work
TO



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
85
can be successful. Tibetans have an ancient saying:
“There is the Sun and the Moon in the sky, there is the
Dalai and the Panchen on the earth”. The question of
the return of devoted Tibetan Buddhists and their
spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, is a concrete reflection
of the ordinary truth spoken by Chairman Mao regarding
the two important issues of religion and nationality.
The restoration of relations between the Central
Government and the Dalai Lama is a question concerning
not only the nationalities within the nation - especially
the Tibetan nationalities from all walks of life – but is
also a moment being anticipated internationally by
people from all circles and the leaders of countries that
have good relations with our nation. At a news conference
held in Beijing, President Clinton of the United States
of America said to Chairman Jiang Zemin: “If you meet
with the Dalai Lama, you both will like each other..."
When that phrase spread to the Tibetan regions, people
there were very excited and moved. “One who wins the
hearts of the people conquers the world”.
Comrade Hu Jintao, you were the leader of Tibet, you
understand Tibet, the feelings and hearts of the average
Tibetans, and you are aware of the facts about the Tibet
issue. Today, once the Tibet issue is satisfactorily solved,
you and the Central Party leaders can meet the Dalai
Lama with affection in the capital of the People's
Republic of China, which will make a stir in the whole
world and in China – especially in every corner of the
Land of Snow there will be great rejoicing.
The above are my basic views and brief comments
aiming to appropriately solve the Tibet issue inherited



86
Witness to Tibet's History
from the past. And I believe that these points of view
can create a common understanding among high-level
Tibetan personnel, and reflect the sincere will of the
average Tibetan people.
For the sake of history, the nationalities, and the nation,
I - being an old Tibetan communist, a retired member
of the Standing Committee of the National People's
Congress, regarding the question that is uncomfortable
to talk about, the question that is sensitive so people
dare not talk, and the question that is related to the
longterm peace and sustained development in the entire
Tibetan regions, including equality and co-existence
between all the nationalities – have written these words
from the bottom of my heart to you and the leaders of
the Central Government Standing Committee for
reference. Any advice is highly appreciated over anything
inappropriate herein.
With regards!
Phuntsok Wangyal (Phunwang)
29 October 2004



Footnotes
1 In October 1949 a public meeting was organised in Bathang
by the “CCP Kham-Tibet Border Work Committee” and its
subsidiary organisation - the “ Youth Federation of Eastern
Kham” – to celebrate the founding of the People's Republic
of China. Since I was concurrently Secretary of the "Bathang
Underground Party” and General-Secretary of the “Youth
Federation of Eastern Kham”, I made a very important speech
and had a group photo taken to record the moment.
2 At the beginning of 1950 the "Bathang Underground Party"
came into contact with the Central Government. Commander-
in-Chief Zhu De sent this telegram: “To Mr. Phuntsok Wangyal
of the Democratic Youth Alliance of Eastern Tibet in Bathang
County of Eastern Kham: We are pleased to receive the
telegram sent by you on 1 July regarding the practical questions
of peacefully liberating Tibet. Please do come to Chongqing
to meet Liu Bocheng, Chairman of the Southwest Military
Committee. From Zhu De”.
Among the files kept in the Central Government Document
office there is a telegram to the Central Government drafted
by Deng Xiaoping on 5 November 1950: “[I] met Phuntsok
Wangyal in Chongqing, thirty-years-old, very able man, has
connections with upper class Tibetans, united a group of
outstanding youths. An open communist in the Kham-Tibet
region, fluent in Chinese, can read English books. Has basic
knowledge of Marxism-Leninism and great power of
understanding. Rare cadre among Tibetan nationalities. Now
Secretary of Ba An county. (We) have decided to order him
to go with the PLA entering Tibet and recommend Phuntsok
Wangyal to join the Tibet Work Committee and become a
member. The Central Government is requested for its



88
Witness to Tibet's History
ST
approval” (twenty-eight-years-old then, knows little English;
Ba An means Bathang).
3 This is the signed copy of On Practice presented to me by
Chairman Mao after the signing of the Peaceful Agreement.
4 This is the last poem I wrote in Qincheng Prison.
The morning sunbeams shoot through the iron window
The setting sunbeams reflect on the frame of the iron door
Locked in a wretched, miserable small cell
Lonely, facing the wall for eighteen years
Hot summers and cold winters come and pass
Flowers of spring and the moon of autumn outside the wall
Excruciating pains in the human realm are diverse
People of purpose and virtue endured suffering
from ancient times.
Thanks to the adversity and fates of fortune
To be enlightened through intense thought and study
Learning to know self and others well
Finding pleasure in bitter life to overcome it.
After suffering comes happiness
I lost my freedom for freedom
I wasn't freed but free again.
5 In 1980, on the stage of the NPC Meeting, comrade Deng
Xiaoping said to me, holding my hand tightly: “You have suffered
a lot. All the cases against you were wrong...” General-Secretary
Hu Yaobang followed up saying: “The reputation has been
restored; all the cases have been rehabilitated”.
In 1980, comrade Deng Xiaoping for the first time met with
the Tenth Panchen Lama after he was released from prison,
and in summary he said: “...you are a great patriot, your
"Seventy-Thousand Character' [Petition) is correct, but some
part of it is wrong. The punishment given to you was heavy.



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
89
But it was all a mistake in Phunwang's case. He was rectified
before the ‘Cultural Revolution', which was a complete mistake.
We have known each other since early 1950. The Central
Government has now appointed him as a member of the
NPC Standing Committee, concurrently being a leader of
nationality work”. (The original copy of this statement was
given to the Panchen Lama and myself, and also issued to the.
Politburo members for reference).
6 Wang Lixiong, the author of this book, went to Tibet almost
twenty times, has been to almost all the regions of Tibet and
understands the feelings of the people there. This book -
which has been translated into English and Tibetan - is very
popular at home and abroad and has attracted people's
attention. He later published the “Synopsis of a Fantasy Novel
Concerning the Dalai Lama”. Through analytical logic he states
in the book that after the Dalai Lama passes away the
Seventeenth Karmapa will inherit his role. There appears a
Fifteenth “Western Dalai” abroad and a "Tibetan Dalai” at
home. The enthronement of the Fifteenth “Tibetan Dalai”
will be presided over by the Chinese-appointed Eleventh
Panchen, which will be opposed by lamas from all the
monasteries leading to an upheaval across Tibetan regions.
And then, due to international intervention, the “Independence
of Tibet” will be achieved followed by the “Independence
of Xinjiang” and the “Independence of (Inner) Mongolia”.
A majority of readers think that even though this is a synopsis
of a fantasy novel, it serves as inspiration and a warning signal.
In order to understand the Tibet of today and in the future it
is worthwhile for the Central Party leaders – if time permits
- to read these two works.
1
7 Regarding the “Four Rivers, Six Ranges” group, namely
the “Protectors of the Dharma”, “Four Rivers” means the
CO



90
Witness to Tibet's History
Salween, Mekong, Yangtze and Yellow rivers; “Six Ranges"
refers to the six ranges and plateau across the Kham and Amdo
regions. The people heading “Four Rivers, Six Ranges” were
mostly representatives of the upper classes from Kham and
Amdo. In the summer of 1957 they collected funds to build
a golden throne for the Dalai Lama, and organised public
meetings to demand a delay in carrying out reforms such as in
Tibet and for direct government by the Dalai Lama in those
regions. Later the “Four Rivers, Six Ranges” established the
“Protectors of the Dharma”, basically formed of Khampas
and Amdowas. The commander, Gonpo Tashi, is from Karze
County of Lithang Prefecture, Vice-Commander Sonam
Dorjee is from Derge, Karze Prefecture (nephew of Shakya
Thupten), and another Vice-Commander, Lo Nyidak of the
Sandutsang family, is from Karze County of Karze Prefecture
(a relative of the Ngapo family).
8 Regarding the question of the "divide-and-rule policy", in
the case of Tsering Dhondup's Tibetan History: – which was
banned by the government - some relevant departments
allowed him to only write “Tibet History” rather than “Tibetan
History”. This is a result of the views held by successive
governments on the policy of “Divide Administratively for
Better Control and Sinocisation”. As far as the Tibetan figures
in history are concerned, it is not possible to write a so-called
“Tibet History”. For example, five hundred years ago the great
master Tsongkhapa – founder of the Gelugpa sect, the largest
sect in Tibetan Buddhism – was from Xining in Qinghai; the
Seventh Dalai Lama, Kalsang Gyatso, was from Lithang
Prefecture of Karze; the Ninth, Lungtok Gyatso, was from
Denke County of Karze Prefecture; the Tenth, Tsultrim Gyatso,
was from Lithang in Karze Prefecture; the Eleventh, Khedrup
Gyatso, was from Ganning County of Karze Prefecture; the
Fourteeth Dalai Lama and the Tenth Panchen Lama were both



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
.:
91
from Qinghai; Tibet's modern scholar, Gendun Choephel, was
from Qinghai; in the past the great abbots of Lhasa scholarship
and the Ganden Tripas were mostly from Western Kham,
and renowned businessmen like Pangdatsang, Sandutsang and
Ngodruptsang were all Khampas. Lobsang Choenze, who
was responsible for the “Fake People's Assembly” that opposed
the signing of the “Peaceful Agreement”, was from Lithang
County of Karze Prefecture; Baba Yeshi, the commander in
the exile Tibetan Government who led the resistance force to
fight against the PLA on the China-India border, was from
Bathang County of Karze Prefecture; Samdhong Rinpoche,
former Chairman of the Assembly of Tibetan People's
Deputies and now Prime Minister of the exile Tibetan
Government, is from Dechen in Yunnan. Therefore, “Tibet
History” cannot be complete without these historic figures
from Eastern Tibet.
9 The Kham and Amdo regions in Eastern Tibet have,
throughout history, been the location where the most heated
racial struggles have taken place. For example, Feng Quan - a
minister of the Qing Dynasty who was sent to Tibet – was
killed by local people when he was passing through Bathang;
the number one and number two leaders of Bathang “native
kingdom”, and the khenpos of the local monasteries, were
therefore executed by the local authorities; that is also the place
where Butcher Zhao Erfeng's name still stinks to eternity.
Throughout history, successive Tibetan movements were led
by well-known people from Bathang such as Kalsang Tsering,
Yangsen (Tibetan), Lobsang Dhondup (Jiang Anxi) and people
from other regions such as Pangda Dorjee. This is why the
policy of “stabilising Kham first for better control of all of
Tibet” used by successive counter-revolutionary governments
came into being
I



ou
o
Wawa
oooooooooooo
.
.
.
*
Se
*
1
13 warm
A .
ws
*
**
.
.
.
*
?
.
Much of the policy which determined the future fate of Tibet was outlined in speeches at
banquets held in Beijing in 1957 to honour the visiting Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama.
Above, Premier Zhou Enlai addressing dinner guests with Deng Xiaoping -- then political
Commissar of the Southwest Military and Administratire Bureau -- seated extreme left.
Below, Phuntsok Wangyal, standing by the microphone, right, acting as Tibetan interpreter
for Marshall Zbu De - Commander-in-Chief of the PL - luring a banquet uttended
by leading PRC military cadres.
:
:
.
2
WORK
*:
*TIT:
3
..
11:



Respected General-Secretary Hu Jintao
My greetings!
On 29 October last year I presented a long letter to
you and the leaders of the NPC Standing Committee.
On 26 February this year -- according to comrade Sheng
Huaren from the NPC Party Group who presided over
the forum attended by Wang Yunlong, Secretary of the
Party Group of the NPC Department of Administration,
Zhuwei Qun, Deputy-Director of the United Front
Department and Sithar, Director of the Tibet Bureau –
entrusted by the Central Government and on behalf of
the Party Group my letter was discussed, emphasising
the need for consistency with the Central Government
on the “Tibetan issue inherited from the past”. And I
was told to think the matters over carefully to put forward
my opinions. Since this happened to be the time of “two
meetings” (the National People's Congress and the
National People's Consultative Meeting), this was
delayed until 4 April. With regard to that letter, I made
some statements and requested the NPC Standing
Committee to report my opinions to the Central
Government. I am now presenting a summary of those
statements below:
1 The letter I presented to General-Secretary Hu Jintao
and to the NPC Standing Committee is in line with the
spirit of the Central Government's initiatives to build a
harmonious and stable socialist society, which can be
proven by the entire contents of that letter, and so it is
needless to restate this.
2 The key concern in the overall question is: Whether
or not it is good for the religious leaders of Tibetan
TT



Witness to Tibet's History
Buddhism – with the Dalai Lama as the head - and the
exile Tibetan Government, including around a hundred
thousand Tibetan compatriots, to return to the nation
or remain abroad. Strategically this is a question which
needs to be carefully considered and deliberately
decided. It is necessary to understand that those Western
anti-China elements are trying to ensure that they (the
Dalai Lama and his exile Tibetan Government) remain
abroad, so as to keep on playing the “Tibet card” for
the sake of their own interests. Therefore, keeping them
abroad is politically shortsighted and irresponsible in
terms of history - creating endless troubles in the future.
On the contrary, working towards the Dalai Lama's
return to the nation will transform passivity to activity,
antagonism to harmony.
Foreign diplomacy is the continuation and extension
of domestic affairs; therefore the policy towards the
overseas Tibetan compatriots should unquestionably be
based on the guiding principles of the Central
Government that advocate “harmony and stability”. For
over a thousand years, in the day-to-day life of devoted
Tibetan Buddhists the intangible has superceded the
tangible in their spiritual sphere; whether or not the hearts
of the people are peaceful and at rest cannot be ignored
and underestimated, especially the general will of the
masses is the most important factor which can play a
decisive role at a very critical moment. Therefore, (we]
must channel our actions according to the situation and
avoid being at a disadvantage.
3 Forgive my being straightforward. The comments
made by the leaders of the United Front Work
Department - let's not talk about other things – are not
COIT
Mni Tenis
1



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
95
TI
with the basic spirit of the Central Government's
initiatives to build a "harmonious and stable” socialist
society. The Central Government emphasises the
importance of “friendship” as the national policy. So far
as the policy towards Taiwan is concerned – the policy
emphasises never censuring past mistakes under the
premise of One China. Nevertheless, the United Front
Department, in line with the “leftist struggle”, has
stressed too much on the “Tibet issue”, with “peace” on
one side and “struggle” on the other. It even adopts
"delaying tactics" to play for time with the Dalai Lama,
waiting until his death. This is apparently a continuation
of the wrong-thinking “leftist” line over nationality and
religious work – especially on the “Tibet issue”.
Everybody is aware that this wrong line of “leftism” has
brought disastrous consequences to the Party, the nation
and the people. That is why it has been negated by Party
decision-making.
4 Unquestionably, I myself and many others who
understand the facts are extremely dissatisfied with this
wrong-thinking line of “leftism” and the mistakes made
by it. Let's just forget other things, merely as far as the
above-mentioned matters are concerned, people make
various comments, such as: Ignoring good advice, they
landed themselves in the trouble of "two Panchens”
today; the two great Buddhist leaders whom the Central
Government used to care about, and who attract world
attention - the Seventeenth Karmapa and Agya
Rinpoche, the abbot of Kumbum Monastery – were also
forced to flee overseas; playing for time, and intending
to produce “two Dalais” will create greater trouble in
the future at home and abroad. However, the question



96
Witness to Tibet's History
of the Dalai Lama's health, and how long he will live,
will not be decided according to the timetable of others.
And regarding such questions, people have further
comments, such as: The Karmapa is likely to be the
successor to the Dalai Lama after his passing, in case of
a period of vacuum of leadership. Although all the heads
of Tibetan Buddhism, from the Gelug, Nyingma, Sakya,
Kagyud and Bonpo, have fled abroad one after another,
they are still the inheritors of the Buddhist doctrines and
are playing an important role, directly and indirectly.
Of course, those mistakes are not related to the leaders
from the United Front Work Department. The question
is related to the Party Line, not to the individuals.
Therefore, in order to improve and intensify the friendly
relations between brotherly nationalities such as the Han
and Tibetans – and for the prosperity and stability of
the nation and the people – this residual “leftist” line
should not be continued; it is time to bring it to an end.
5 The letter I presented to the Central Government is
concerned with the entire Tibetan nationality and peace
and stability across the Tibetan regions in the Land of
Snow, which occupies a quarter of the total area of the
nation, and is related to a far-sighted, longterm strategic
policy that needs to be sensibly considered and carefully
decided, rather than being a question of seeking advice
on current policy and concrete matters. Some people
who are responsible for the relevant departments, who
ignore the actual situation and don't care about the
wishes of the masses, will not think deeply about their
attitudes and words; they will not even undergo self-
censure. Therefore I sincerely request the NPC Party
Group to hand over (my letter to the Central
cro.
V21



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
97
Government - headed by General-Secretary Hu Jintao
-- and forward it to the Central Institute of Political
Research for their practical, objective suggestions based
on the principle of seeking truth from facts. All
decisions will then be up the Central Government.
With regard to the comments made by the United Front
Work Department, besides the general tone that they
adopted, [they] strayed from the point when mentioning
my “talk” with Li Weihan in 1982, and criticised me for
adhering to the so-called “consistently incorrect point
of view”, my view on “the greater Tibetan regions”. But
that was actually a plot attributed to Old Li by some
specific leaders who had me sent to prison for eighteen
years and have never admitted their mistakes. Old Li,
aged eighty six, is now in hospital; those people have
not even seen his articles; so what is the value of their
comments?
I wrote a letter of twenty thousand characters to the
leaders of the Central Government, and particularly
wrote a letter to comrade Deng Xiaoping and General-
Secretary Hu Yaobang appealing to the Central
Government to form a study team to clarify the
arguments on the theoretical principles of nationality.
Fortunately, after the Central Government looked into
this, their summing up was that “according to the
regulations of the Party it is permitted to hold different
points of view”, and the case was held over indefinitely,
with some statements made by comrade Zhong Xun.
Therefore, after twenty three years, referring to the talk
with Old Li is unnecessary and of no significance.
6 As early as the 1940s I was the main person
responsible for all kinds of revolutionary activities of



98
Witness to Tibet's History
-
was the only Tibetan among the members of the Party
Committee for the PLA's Lhasa advance troop and of
the CCP Tibet Work Committee during the '50s. For the
sake of the Party, the people and history, and following
the principle of being a communist who must be open
and above-board, and must not hide any opinions, I
present this letter to the leaders of the Central Party,
and send it to some Tibetan comrades for reference.
I believe that this letter has fully reflected the
expectations and wishes of ordinary Tibetans on the
restoration of relations between the Central Government
and the Dalai Lama. Many Tibetan comrades have
directly or indirectly expressed their agreement to my
views. “Bitter medicine is good for ailments, good advice
is unpleasant to the ears”. My letter cannot be supposed
to be good medicine, but having a clear conscience –
and from the bottom of my heart - I sincerely state the
views that people feel uncomfortable talking about, dare
not talk about to protect themselves, and the questions
that are sensitive to some people. Whether or not the
views will be adopted is entirely up to the Central
Government's decision-making. As an individual I am
powerless. But time will prove all and history will make
a fair evaluation.
7 Any Communist Party member or citizen has the right
to offer various kinds of opinions to the Central
Government, and those opinions can also be passed on
to other comrades for reference. But of course, it is
without question that before the views in the letter can
be accepted they must be consistent with the opinions
currently carried by the Central Government. But if some
relevant departments make comments as they wish with



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
99
regards to the letter, I will reserve my right to
correspondingly give explanations.
Comrade Hu Jintao, I completely understand that the
leaders of the CCP Standing Committee, headed by you,
are deeply occupied with the affairs of State.
Nevertheless, the question of the Tibet issue today is
the most important of our entire nation's nationality
works. Though I am in sound health, clear-minded, and
able to write and give lectures, time does not spare
people. I am now eighty three years old and have no
ambition for fame and repute. I have spoken the truth
from facts, and this is all purely in the interests of the
State and nationalities. Looking forward to understanding
if there is anything inappropriate herein.
With regards
Phuntsok Wangyal (Phunwang)
12 April 2005



WS
*****
Jt
**
.
Lengthy talks between Premier Zivou Enlai (left) and the Dalai Lama, at
Chengitu in 1957, ipere interepreteri in. Phuntsok Il'angrai who also helped His
Holiness sort through notes on the Balk. llurshall Chinh 7 (right) comparing
21101 002 their return froni ijle Vu!!-uurid Conference in Kundwg. Inidonesia.
$
í



Dear Secretary Hu Jintao
My greetings! I have to bother you again.
It is said that in February this year comrade Yin Fatang
(also dragging in comrades Dorjee Tsetan and Jiang
Hongquan) wrote a letter to you and the Central
Government leaders, including some relevant
departments, regarding “The Golden Key -- The
Seventeen-Point Agreement” published in China's Tibet
- a publication of the Central Government's United
Front Work Department - carrying out a personal attack
on myself and comrade Fan Ming. He made statements
like: “What should be particularly noticed is the unusual
relationship between comrade Phunwang and the
Fourteenth Dalai, and comrade Fan Ming's wrong attitude
towards the Tenth Panchen. Though there are differences
in terms of the nature of these two matters, and
differences in the form in which these two matters would
disturb the correct policy carried out by the Central
Government, the influence caused is huge.” He even
went further, stating that “There is also a problem with
comrade Phunwang's recognition of, and style of work
towards the Dalai, some of which even went beyond
what is proper.”
If this evidence had not been written in black and white,
it would be really unimaginable that at the present time
there are still such false accusations that confuse right
from wrong.
As early as the 1980s, comrade Yin Fatang - who had
been transferred to Tibet as TAR Party-Secretary – was
for the first time secretly informing the Central



102
Witness to Tibet's History
ai
Government about the interference of Dalai, Panchen
and Phunwang, the three major figures in the work on
Tibet. In this report, though he partially quoted some
of the statements made by Dalai and Panchen, the
main contents were aimed at me. He even said
something like “Phunwang's rehabilitation was a must,
but after being rehabilitated he is still making
comments about the 'Independence of Tibet'. In recent
years there were popular rumours spreading that
Phunwang was coming back to Tibet to be the
Chairman of the [TAR] Government...he had brought
with him a lot of Tibetan cadres from Bathang whose
ranks are now above Bureau Level, and because those
Tibetan cadres who have now became the major pillars
among the nationality cadres have good relations with
Phunwang, there could be the possibility that some
major issue could arise in Tibet,” etc.
After the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh CCP
a thousand political prisoners were released in Tibet
and Tibetan-inhabited regions, including the Tenth
Panchen Lama who regained his freedom in February
of 1978 after a ten-year sentence. In April the same
year, after eighteen years of imprisonment in Qincheng
Number One Prison, I was also released. Soon after
that, under the care of comrade Deng Xiaoping, Chen
Yun, Hu Yaobang, Feng Wenbing, etc., myself and a
hundred Tibetan Party members, and members of the
Youth League that I used to be responsible for, were
also rehabilitated from our unjust cases. In 1980, when
comrade Hu Yaobang met me at Zhongnanhai for the
first time, he said: “It is a great victory to meet each
other alive!” During the conversation with comrade Hu



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
103
Yaobang, he wanted me to go back to Tibet to be in
charge of the main work there in the TAR Government,
and he said: “In two years' time, you Tibetans will be
the Secretary of the TAR Party Committee.” I also
explained to Secretary Hu Yaobang that during my time
in prison I diligently studied the classic works of Marx,
Engels, Lenin, Stalin and Mao Zedong; I even read some
of those classic works several times. Particularly in terms
of dialectics, I then accumulated new knowledge in
theory, so it was rather more important for me to work
on the revision of my book than go back to Tibet.
It is obvious that comrade Yin Fatang had suspicions and
was disturbed by the rumours that I was to go back to Tibet,
and over the things relating to his personal fame and position.
It was this which made him send secret reports to the Central
Government on the so-called “Interference of Three Major
Figures Over the Work on Tibet”. Clearly seen in this light,
the purpose and motivation behind all this is not for the
sake of work in Tibet.
In 1981 I went back to Tibet for the first time on an
inspection tour; and after learning about the secret
report by Yin Fatang. I explained and clarified the issue
at the Secretary Meeting of the TAR Party Committee,
hoping that he would treat this with an open mind, but
the result proved this was in vain. Therefore, after
coming back to Beijing I had to write a letter of appeal
to the Central Government.
In the summer of 1982, Yang Jingren, director of the
United Front Work Department as well as deputy director
of the State Nationalities' Affairs Commission, again
without any regret lodged a complaint to comrade Deng



104
Witness to Tibet's History
Xiaoping intending to frame me once more. Using “Some
Opinions on the Amendment to the Constitution
Regarding the Nationalities' Work”, which I submitted
in 1980 to the Central Government, and with “The
Summary of Talks Between Phunwang and the
Delegation of Returning Tibetans” which I published in
the “Supplementary Publication on Theory” of the
Central Government Party School as the base,'he accused
me of having made a major theoretical mistake regarding
the Nationality Work. And later he also drafted a
document of a hundred thousand characters, trying to
persuade comrade Li Weihan, who was then hospitalised,
to have a “talk” with me. In response to this, I then wrote
a letter of a hundred thousand characters pleading with
the Central Government to set up a team for theoretical
investigation to establish the rights and wrongs. Soon
after that the investigation ended up with Xi Zhongxun,
secretary of the Central Government Secretariat,
representing the Central Government, stating that
“[There are different opinions within the Party, so one
is entitled to hold one's own opinion”.
In the autumn of 1982, when the Panchen Lama went
to Tibet on his inspection tour, Xue Jianhua, the deputy
director of the State Nationalities' Affairs Commission,
who was accompanying the Panchen Lama, showed the
draft of a "talk” with “Old Li”[Comrade Li Weihan] to
Ying Fatang without requesting permission from the
Central Government - which itself ran counter to the
regulations and rules of the Party. He [Yin Fatang) passed
on the draft at the TAR Party Committee Meeting, asking
everybody to offer their opinions, criticisms and to draw
a so-called “spiritual line" over it. The draft circulated



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
105
S
by him even reached to the County Level. Later, on
realising this, the Central Government criticised him and
stopped what he was doing.
After the Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh CCP
the Party and the Nation's work had transformed from
political struggle to the policy of “Opening the Gate to
the Outside” which had construction of the economy
as its core. But Yin Fatang thought that considering the
special nature of Tibet's situation, the political struggle
against anti-separatists should be the priority, and
unquestionably the political struggle was the struggle
against the “Three Major Figures”. On realising this the
Central Government clearly instructed that although
anti-separatism was the major focus, Tibet still should
be in line with the entire nation, having economic
construction as its core. The Central Government also
clearly stated that today the Dalai Lama is striving for
all this; the Panchen as vice-director of the Committee
is our man; Phunwang is a member of the NPC Standing
Committee and a communist member, so he is even more
our man. Therefore, having the “Three Major Figures”
as the objects of political struggle is a mistake.
After the serious criticism made by the Central
Government, and according to instructions from the
Central Government, Yin Fatang had no choice than to
come to my home, and the Panchen Lama's home, to
beg our pardon. Those who came to my home with Ying
Fatang were Dorjee Tsetan, the Chairman of the TAR
Government, Raidi, the vice-secretary, and the Chairman
of the TAR Political Consultative Committee, Yangling
Dorjee, etc. I even have no hatred towards those people
like Yang Jingren, etc., who once plotted against me which



106
Witness to Tibet's History
landed me in prison. Therefore, since comrade Yin Fatang
apologised for stabbing me in the back, in response to
the call of the Party to “look ahead”, I too won't argue
further.
But what I never expected is that, after twenty five years,
Yin Fatang would once again launch a personal attack on
me, saying some nonsense like I have an unusual
relationship with the Dalai Lama. I must state here that in
1950, being a member of the Tibet Work Committee as
well as vice-secretary of the Chamdo Branch Work
Committee, I was assigned to work on Ngapo according
to the Party Committee's decision which was done
perfectly well. Later I was to work on the Dalai Lama and
upper-class Tibetans. The relationship between myself and
the Dalai Lama was clearly referred to in many parts of
his Freedom in Exile. During the Dalai Lama's one-year tour
in inland China, Liu Geping, the Director of the NPC
State Nationalities' Affairs Commission and I
systematically introduced him to the ideas of communists
and communism. I was the one to explain more. In his
book he even expressed his wish to join the Communist
Party and stated words like “...still I am a half
communist”. His comments on me are quoted in the
sentence below: “I have consistently believed that as long
as Chairman Mao trusts in Phuntsok Wangyal, there is
hope for Tibet” etc. In 1954 the Dalai Lama was elected
as a vice-committee member of the NPC Standing
Committee, and later he concurrently held the position as
the deputy director of the TAR Preparatory Committee.
Ngapo and I were the secretary and vice-secretary
respectively. I also was the party secretary of the TAR
Office Department. So, due to the nature of our work, we
used to have frequent contact with each other.



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
107
10
In 1958 I was rectified in the name of so-called Anti-
local Nationalism, and was transferred to Beijing. In 1959
a major riot occurred in Tibet, so the Dalai Lama and
the officials of the Kashag Government escaped. So far
it has been forty eight years since that time, and I have
not met him even once in person. After the early 1980s,
the Dalai Lama wrote letters and sometimes phoned the
Panchen Lama, Ngapo and myself, which was reported
to the Central Government without anything hidden, and
letters of reply were also sent after being examined by
the leaders of relevant departments. In 1998, when I was
in Switzerland to consult a specialist for my eye problem,
the Dalai Lama enthusiastically phoned me saying that
he had decided to come to Switzerland to see me in
person, which should be considered a privilege according
to Tibetan tradition. But after asking for instructions
from the Central Government, I rejected politely
according to their decision, and also handed over the
recorded telephone conversation to the Central Party
Office. What is more important is that in order to solve
the issue relating to the Tibetan Exile Government in
Dharamsala, where all the heads of the religious sects
of Tibetan Buddhism concentrate, and the hundred
thousand Tibetan compatriots with the Dalai Lama as
their core, last year – based on irrefutable facts and for
the sake of the fundamental interests of the nation and
of the nationality – braving risks and misconceptions I
touched upon a question that most are afraid to mention,
dare not raise, and something that is sensitive. I openly
and above-board presented to the leaders of the Central
Government two consecutive letters expressing my points
of view without any reservation. Based upon facts, I
las



108
Witness to Tibet's History
also uncovered and criticised the mistakes made by the
United Front Work Department in these matters. No
matter what Yin Fatang said about my “recognition” and
"style of work” towards Dalai Lama being “unusual” or
“having gone beyond what is proper", the facts are what
I have stated above and there is no single word or deed
that I should be ashamed of. After all, what I am hoping
for is the restoration of relations between the Dalai Lama
and the Central Government rather than their separation.
The fundamental nature of the issue is that, under the
historical conditions of today it is rather beneficial for
the Tibetan, Han and other brotherly nationalities to
remain united on the basis of nationalities' equality rather
than separating, which on the contrary would be harmful.
This standpoint of mine is always consistent, be it within
the Party or outside the Party, nationally or
internationally, not only today but also going back twenty
five years. Soon after I was released from prison, I also
stated the same in “The Summary of Talks Between
Phunwang and the Delegation of Returning Tibetans”.
However, this time comrade Ying Fatang had a
recurrence of his old disease; he tried every means to
provoke a controversy after eventually discovering “The
Golden Key” published in China's Tibet, using this as an
excuse to scold Fan Ming while diverting the main subject
of attack to me. Being a military man, Yin Fatang
understands the logic that there can never be too much
deception in war. He tried to please the public with
claptrap and put the [black] hat on someone else. It
appears that he has avoided mentioning the two
important letters which I presented to the Central
Government, but has beaten around the bush saying,
excus



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
109
“There is a difference in the nature of two matters,
and a difference in the way that these two matters would
disturb the policy of the Central Government, the
resulting influence is huge.” In February this year, he
wrote a letter to the Central Government, and copied
this to the United Front Work Department, Party
Organisation, Propaganda Department, and even the
Public Security Department. He has left no stone
unturned. Comrade Yin Fatang should not forget
Chairman Mao's words: “Be open and above board, not
engaging in schemes and intrigues.”
Secondly, Yin Fatang also mentioned: “Some aspects
of his background are still not clear.” Here I must point
out that this is exactly the issue that drove me into eighteen
years' imprisonment in the name of “investigation in
isolation”. In 1980 some relevant departments including
the State Nationalities’ Affairs Commission, etc. jointly
decided on the rehabilitation of all charges, wiping out
all the untrue words. Moreover, the Chinese Communist
Central Government made a final conclusion in 1985
regarding the question of my Party origins, Party seniority
and work seniority. The main thrust of the conclusion
was that “After Comrade Phunwang met with Comrade
Ye Jianying in 1940 in Chongqing, he went back to Tibet
to carry out all kinds of revolutionary activities,
developing a number of Tibetan communists, which is a
fact that should be acknowledged. And his Party seniority
should be calculated from August 1949 after [he] made
contact with the Chinese Communist Shanxi Local
Committee; his work seniority dates from 1940. As to
the Party seniority and work seniority of the rest of the
comrades, it should be carried out in line with the same
spirit.” My history and background are clearly known by



110
Witness to Tibet’s History
the (Party) Organisation. Whatever the decision will be,
it absolutely depends upon the official documents of the
State Nationalities' Affairs Commission and the Central
Government of the Chinese Communist Party. What
right and seniority does comrade Yin Fatang have to be
overcritical on this?
And also the article "The Golden Key” quoted a few
sentences from “History Won't Forget Him” written by
Wang Fan which was published in the magazine Ren Wu
[The People), over which Yin Fatang said: “This book
has quoted his own account, unchanged (some of which
is true and some is yet to be clarified), which is not
appropriate.” With regard to this case, in the spring of
1951, I accompanied Ngapo from Chamdo to Beijing
for the Peaceful Talks soon after Premier Zhou had
named the delegates of the Central Government and of
Tibet. He appointed myself and comrade Le Yuhong as
observers and, at the request of Premier Zhou and
comrade Li Weihan, I was assigned as the political
interpreter during the duration of the Peaceful Talks,
participating in the translation work of the entire
agreements into Tibetan. And then I accompanied Ngapo
back to Lhasa via Chongqing and Chamdo. I worked hard
day and night for the Peaceful Talks and I did everything
that I could. I absolutely confirm the authenticity of the
contents of the interview. Chairman Mao, Premier Zhou
and Old Li also spoke highly of my contributions during
the Peaceful Talks. Chairman Mao also specially
presented a copy of On Theory to me with his own
signature reading: “To Comrade Phuntsok Wangyal, from
Mao Zedong.” I have kept this carefully till today.
At the cocktail party held to mark the successful signing
om



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
111
of the Peaceful Talks, which was attended by around
three hundred guests including Commander-in-Chief
Zhu, Li Weihan said in front of everyone, holding up a
glass of wine: “This is to you for having contributed a
lot during the Peaceful Talks!” Ngapo and others also
highly praised my work. Kheme, the representative of
Tibet who was Commander-in-Chief of the Tibetan
Army – a decisive figure – said: “Two years ago, I and
the Kashag Government deported you from Tibet
suspecting you to be a communist. So now, during these
talks, I have had misgivings. During my childhood I learnt
the - three-word phrase – from the ambans stationed in
Tibet. I also visited Nanjing, the capital of the Nationalist
Government, several times. So I can understand simple
spoken Chinese. During the talks there were many heated
debates, especially on the question of establishing a
military committee. When both sides were locked in a
heated argument, you interpreted Li's words 'Off with
your bed-rolls and go back to Tibet' in a mild tone saying
that what Old Li meant is that “Today we have
misunderstandings, so you go back to Beijing Hotel and
let's talk it over later'... Indeed you have put your best
endeavours into the restoration of friendly relations
between the Han and Tibetan nationalities, so we the
representatives of Tibet thank you!” In 1982, when Old
Li was having a talk with me, he even said: “Thirty one
years have passed since the Peaceful Talks with Tibet;
we depend on you, your contribution is great...” He went
further saying: “That time I said words out of anger.”
(The United Front Work Department has a cassette
recording of the Talks). Everybody knows that from the
beginning to the end comrade Yin Fatang had nothing



112
Witness to Tibet's History
to do with the Peaceful Talks with Tibet, so what is the
basis for comrade Yin Fatang's unreasonable statements
like "untrue” and “yet to be examined?”
To think that comrade Yin Fatang is arrogantly accusing
the author of the “The Golden Key” – saying something
like: “In light of the fact that the Central Government
has no real knowledge of him, it is unnecessary to quote
the comments by him...” when what comrade Yin Fatang
pointed at is the author quoting a statement made in
Deng Xiaoping Wen Xuan (Collected Works of Deng
Xiaoping) fully affirming the “Democratic Youth Alliance
of Eastern Tibet" with me as its head. But the fact is
that in early 1950 I received a telegraphed instruction
from Commander-in-Chief Zhu to go from the yet-to-
be-liberated Tibet to newly-liberated Chongqing to meet
with the leaders like comrade Liu Bocheng, Deng
Xiaoping, He Long, Wang Weizhou etc; meanwhile the
Southwest Bureau contacted Song Rendong, Chen Geng
etc, from Yunnan Provincial Committee, and they also
learnt from Ogen, the secretary of the Chinese
Communist Party Shanxi Local Committee something
about the “Bathang Underground Party" and its affiliated
organisation called “The Democratic Youth Alliance of
Eastern Tibet”. When mentioning the episodes above,
comrade Deng Xiaoping said to me: “You have been held
in high esteem by comrade Liu Wenhui, but he avoids
mentioning the fact that he was ordered by the
Nationalist Government to arrest you.” After the
meeting, comrade Deng Xiaoping reported to the Central
Party Government. So there is no concrete basis for the
leaders of the Southwest Bureau to make something out
of nothing about me and the “Democratic Youth Alliance



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
113
of Eastern Tibet”. Yin Fatang is even overstepping the
mark, hinting that comrade Deng Xiaoping was rash to
affirm me and the “Democratic Youth Alliance of
Eastern Tibet”. It is obvious that he has no idea what
this is all about, but on the contrary accuses the leaders
of the Central Government. There isn't a single reason
to base this on, and on the other hand how disdainful
and arrogant he is!
Looking into the speeches and statements made by
comrade Yin Fatang in the past and today, on the one
hand he has to admit the historical impact made in the
'50s by the Bathang Tibetan comrades being part of the
main pillar among the nationality cadres, and [he] has to
admit the historical contributions made by them in the
liberation and construction of Tibet. But, on the other
hand, politically and spiritually he has never
acknowledged the legal status of the “Bathang
Underground Party” and the “Democratic Youth Alliance
of Eastern Tibet”; up until now he refers to those people
as “That Gang”?
Although as early as the 1980s I personally handed over
the documents relating to the conclusions of the
reinvestigation to comrade Zhang Xiangming, deputy
director of the Consultative Committee of the TAR Party
Committee, and explained some more relevant points,
so far until now those so-called “Old Tibet”, headed by
Yin Fatang, have never mentioned a single word in the
official reports and publications about the historical truth
of the democratic revolutionary activities that we carried
out in the Tibetan regions for almost ten years before
and after the Liberation. Those people not only reject
history, but in fact they also disregard the decisions made
by the Central Government.



114
Witness to Tibet's History
With Yin Fatang as the consultant, a TV programme
called Xizang Feng Yun (Changing Tibet), with heavy
financing, was shown on CCTV. In the script, even
though I was the only Tibetan among the eleven
committee members of the Chinese Communist Tibet
Work Committee from 1950-1958, the only Tibetan
among the five leaders in the Lhasa Advance Troop of
the PLA marching into Tibet, the director of the
Eighteenth Army Civil Transportation Department, and
I am the one who the foreign media label “The Red
Tibetan who brought the Red Chinese into Tibet”, still
they used a fictitious name for me in the TV programme.
But eventually, since it seemed really impossible to evade
the subject, in Bathang they had to include a bit part
whose words were: “The apple in Bathang is really
delicious!” In contrast, in the programme they described
Chen Xizhang, the director of the earlier Tibet Office
of the Nationalist Government, as a smart and intelligent
youth in his prime, which drew widespread comments
saying that underestimating and belittling a young
Tibetan communist, while eulogising and favouring an
old Chinese Nationalist has apparently proven that “The
sun can be seen in a small drop of water; the real spirit
can be observed through a small matter”.
However, it happened that soon after Changing Tibet was
released on primetime TV, The Flowers of the Thinking and
Dialectics of the Philosophers in the Land of Snow – the
Conclusion that Liquid Water Does Exist on the Moon, written
and edited by a famous Tibetan poet, Yiten Cairang, was
published including more than ten rare historical photos
covering the entire proceedings of the Peaceful Talks,
from the Dalai Lama meeting with Zhang Jinwu, Zhang



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
115
Guohua etc., in Lhasa, the Central Party leaders including
Chairman Mao meeting with the Dalai Lama and the
Panchen Lama and their activities in inland China, to
Vice-Premier Chen Yi in Lhasa attending the founding
ceremony of the TAR Preparatory Committee, etc. I am
included in all those photos which undoubtedly proves
my role in Tibet's contemporary history. The question is
not at all about me showing off, but the question
concerning the birth of Tibetan revolutionary
organisations and almost ten years of democratic
revolutionary activities - with me playing a major role –
being denied, underestimated and even disregarded,
which is the key to the entire issue.
It is necessary to point out that ours was the only Tibetan
Communist Organisation operating in the Tibetan
regions after having contact with the Chinese
Communists and the Soviet Communists (also with their
financial support). Later we had very close contact with
the Indian Communists as well. Once, taking the risk,
we courageously brought a large number of books on
Marxism, Leninism and Mao Zedong Thought into
Tibetan regions like Kangding, Derge, Bathang, Dechen
and Lhasa, etc., to spread the revolutionary seeds. We
appealed to the Tibetan Kashag Government for
democratic reforms and for the reduction of people's
burdens due to which I was expelled from Tibet by the
Tibetan Kashag Government which suspected me of
being a communist. When the founding of New China
was declared the “Bathang Underground Party" and the
“Democratic Youth Alliance of Eastern Tibet” raised
high the five-star flag - the National Flag of the People's
Republic of China - for the first time in the entire Tibetan



116
Witness to Tibet's History
territory. In the “New Cultural Home” that was newly-
established, (we) brought out a lot of works of Marx and
Lenin and other progressive books from the basement,
and we also hung the portraits of Marx, Engels, Lenin,
Stalin and Mao Zedong on the walls. The comrades from
“Bathang Underground Party” and the “Democratic
Youth Alliance of Eastern Tibet”, who joined the army
and participated in the politics, by historic significance
converged with comrade Wang Qimei, General Li Jue
and other comrades like Miao Fengshu, Pan Jizhong, Xu
Danlu, Chen Jingpo etc., from the PLA when they were
marching to Tibet. Wang Qimei and Miao Fengshu even
conversed with me. For the first time the Chinese
comrades listened to the Internationale and The Song of the
Democratic Youth Alliance of Eastern Tibet being sung by
the Tibetan comrades in Tibetan*. Everything mentioned
above is fact, but Changing Tibet didn't touch upon any
of it. Ngapo also said: “How strange it is that there is
not any role for Phunwang!” Comrade Yin Fatang even
rewrote and covered up the historical facts while the
person involved is still living. This clearly reveals the
standpoints, views and authenticity of the contents of
Xizang Jiefang Shi (The History of Liberating Tibet].
The letter comrade Yin Fatang presented to the Central
Government also stated: “With regard to Phunwang's
request to distribute the translated version of his book
FA Tibetan Revolutionary) within the nation, I reported to
the Central Government on 15 September 2004.” So in
that regard, and to the question of translating my book,
it is not at my request, but my agreement to what
Goldstein said that someone in the Chinese Centre for
Tibetology wanted to translate my book into Chinese.



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
117
And as to the publication of my book in America, I once
wrote to the leaders of the Central Government
presenting the necessary explanation. Goldstein said that
he had written a book on Old Tibet called The Demise of
the Lamaist State. Now he wanted to write something on
how the New Tibet was born, and that is why he came
to me for the interviews. All my answers to what he asked
are based on the standpoint of being a Marxist and
communist, since I mentioned before that my basic point
of view is this: Under the historical conditions of New
China, I always hold the position that on the premise of
nationality equality it is beneficial for the Han, Tibetan
and the rest of the fifty five nationalities to be united.
Which is the precondition to determining whether or not
to uphold the big nationalities family in New China.
Whoever wants to nitpick over this fundamental issue,
and try to put the blame on someone else, would be
undoubtedly doing so in vain. Comrade Yin Fatang -
after having merely looked at the Preface, and without
any knowledge on the contents of the book – wrote the
Central Government a letter in such a hurry trying to
stop the translation and the book's publication. What is
he plotting? How outrageous it is! This book was not
published after he wrote that letter to the Central
Government. But in foreign countries the book has not
only been published in large quantities in English but also
in Tibetan. So far as I know the French version of the
book is to be published next year, and someone even wants
to translate it into German. In addition to that, The
Contemporary History of Tibet: The political career of Phuntsok
Wangyal (in more than five hundred pages) written by a
Japanese professor has recently been published in Tokyo,
omeon



118
Witness to Tibet's History
and last month he sent me a copy. The question of history
- as long as it is factual - is an objective reality. Nobody
can distort it, nor can it be covered up; since it is a matter
of fact it is, after all, impossible to do so. Trying to stop
the publication of the book here, with backing of one's
network, cannot be done elsewhere. The key point is the
value of the book.
At the time when Comrade Hu Yaobang met me and
asked me to go back to Tibet to work, I requested him
to let me sort through the understanding on philosophy
that I had acquired in prison. Later, I wrote and published
consecutively three monographs on philosophy – New
Investigations into Dialectics (around 800,000 characters),
Liquid Water Does Exist on the Moon (around 200,000
characters) and New Investigations into Natural Dialectics
(around 600,000 characters). The book New Investigations
into Natural Dialectics that I wrote recently included
“Research on the New Investigations into Dialectics in
Comparison with Zhou Yi Ba Gua" and many other
philosophical theses including sketches. The leaders of
the National Peoples' Congress specially gave a written
instruction to its publishing house for them to publish
my book, Recall and New Analysis (in around 600,000
characters) that is now in the process of final checking.
After the publication of New Investigations into Dialectics,
a symposium was held by the Society of the History of
Chinese Marxist Philosophy in the Tibet Hall of the
Great Hall of the People, the leaders of the Party and
the Central Government such as Song Renqong,
Penchong, Ngapo, Wang Hanging, Hu Shen, etc.,
attended the symposium. Fei Xiaotong, Yan Jici and Ren
Jiyu, etc., sent me congratulatory letters, and around



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
119
ten experts and scholars from theoretical research circles
in Beijing made speeches giving unequivocal
endorsements. CCTV, Central Government People's
Broadcasting, People's Daily and Guang Ming Daily, etc.,
also reported the event. Soon after that the Society of
the History of Chinese Marxist Philosophy edited the
speeches made by the leaders of the Central Government,
as well as by the experts and scholars attending the
symposium, and published The Flower of Dialectics –
Phuntsok Wangyal and his New Investigations into Dialectics.
In the letter comrade Yin Fatang presented to the
Central Government, he said: “Fortunately the author
[of History Won't Forget Him did not discover the rest of
his book; if the author had the problem would be more
severe.” It is really hard to understand what reason, and
what kind of mentality, makes Comrade Yin Fatang so
worried about my book and so full of loathing for it.
Honestly speaking, I am not at all concerned with whether
or not to publish my biography or where to publish it.
Finally, it is necessary to mention a few things by the
way. I don't have to speak up for comrade Fan Ming
over the vicious remarks that comrade Yin Fatang made
about him in his long statement. But it is necessary to
point out that the policy of the Central Government in
the 1950s towards Tibet, with the Dalai Lama and his
Tibetan Kashag Government that ruled over Tibet for
more than three hundred and thirty years as the subject,
is absolutely appropriate to the ground reality of Tibet
and is correct. Comrade Zhang Jinwu and Zhang Guohua,
etc., had strictly carried out this policy, while comrade
Fan Ming and a few other people acted to diametrically
oppose it. Since I was upholding the Central



.
120
Witness to Tibet's History
Government's policy, Fan Ming took me to be a member
of the “Zhang Guohua Gang” of the Southwest Bureau.
Later all these people, including Fan Ming, publicly
apologised to me. So far as I know his distorted viewpoint
regarding the issue of Tibet has not yet changed; on the
contrary, it has been getting more severe.
Recently comrade Yin Fatang has been very active in
public life. Despite the fact that General Li Jue, the then
Commissioner of the Eighteenth Army, as well as a
committee member of the Chinese Communist Tibet
Work Committee in the 1950s, is still in sound health
(now we are the only two members of the Tibet Work
Committee left) he Yin Fatang still poses as the true
representative of “Old Tibet”. Those who know reality
can understand him and forgive him. In the early 1980s
comrade Xiaoping said to the Panchen Lama on behalf
of the Central Government: “You are a great patriot!”
Soon after that, when the Central Government decided
to let the Panchen Lama return to Tibet on an inspection
tour, Yin Fatang-being the TAR Secretary there – tried
all means possible to oppose this and create obstacles,
even launching a personal attack. Since the Central
Government had already agreed, as well as the Panchen
Lama insisting, having no choice Yin Fatang could only
treat the nation's leader, the Vice-Director of the NPC
Standing Committee, with “First Level Vigilance” as
though encountering the enemy. The related information
can be seen in documents issued by the Central
Government. A few years ago, when comrade Yin Fatang
was talking with some Tibetan writers, he queried: “Is it
worth it to write the biography of Panchen? He is no
more than the 'Number Two Serf Owner' who has not



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
121
been completely remoulded, not to mention the ‘Number
One Serf Owner' the Dalai.”
Today China has abandoned the era of “class struggle”,
unprecedented changes are taking place everywhere, and
the glorious achievements are attracting world attention.
But comrade Yin Fatang and a few “Old Tibet”, deep
down in their souls, still cannot distance themselves from
the wrong-thinking of “Surpass England, Compete with
America, and Speed Up Communist Society” that had
“class struggle as its objective” which has already been
repudiated by the Central Government in published
documents. Intentionally or unintentionally, they treat
the twenty wrong years, especially the ten calamitous
years that brought disaster to the people, as times of
"great achievements”, the bitter historical lesson as
glorious and something to flaunt. Therefore their thinking
has not changed, let alone advanced with the era. To
understand the so-called “Policy of Governing Tibet”
that they are propagating, means still lingering in the era
of “Leftism”. So this is the key point of the issue and
something tragic. In the early days after the liberation of
Chamdo, I knew comrade Yin Fatang, the then vice
commissar of the Fifty Second Battalion. After I came
back to Lhasa, he and his troops had been stationed in
Gyantse in Central Tibet for a long period. We hardly
met with each other, so I never said or did anything that
would have been offensive to him. But he has repeatedly
had a desire to plot against me. History tells us that the
one who is plotting against somebody is either motivated
by bias or jealousy, and is scrambling for name and
political profit.
Recently there has been talk that Tibetan Buddhism,
the one that is regarded as a spiritual science and
1



122
Witness to Tibet's History
worldview of non-creation, has been becoming
increasingly popular in the west. It has more and more
followers, especially within intellectual circles. If the
inherited problem with Tibet continues to be delayed, it
is most likely going to result in the creation of “The
Eastern Vatican of Tibetan Buddhism” alongside the
Exile Tibetan Government. Then the “Tibet Problem”,
be it internationally or nationally, will become more
complicated and more troublesome. Therefore I believe
the letters I presented to the Central Government, being
in line with National Policy, and reflecting the will of
the people, will be proven right by history. So whatever
trouble comrade Yin Fatang is trying to stir up by rumour-
mongering is useless. Since Buddhism is deeply-rooted
in the hearts of the entire population of the Land of
Snow, it is rather beneficial for the Dalai Lama to have
unity with the Central Government rather than separation
from it, which is the key point of the issue. But of course,
the wishes of the Dalai Lama towards the Central
Government are first of all a domestic issue rather than
a foreign affair in terms of their nature and preconditions.
Based on the Constitution of our nation and its spirit
relating to the Law of Nationality's Autonomy, everyone
believes the Central Government will handle the issue
with great care and solve it appropriately. Today the
income from the tourist industry in Tibet is increasing
and the railway has been put into operation. Everyone
wants to go to Tibet; in addition to looking at the snow
mountains, the grasslands, and breathing pure air, the
most important reason is to visit the famous Potala Palace
which has been placed on the World Heritage List, and
was renovated at enormous cost by the Central
Government. Over the past three hundred years, the



Baba Phuntsok Wangyal
123
Potala Palace has been the winter palace since the time
of the Fifth Dalai Lama, and the Norbulingka, which
has also been renovated, the summer place. If the Dalai
Lama, who has been in exile for a long time, came back
to Tibet it would be very effective and significant. Of
course, in accordance with the wish of the Dalai Lama
not to engage in politics, but concentrate on religious
activities, it would be beneficial for the stability and
harmony of the nation, and good for "stabilising Tibet",
including the entire Tibetan regions that occupy a quarter
of the total territory of the nation.
In a word, comrade Yin Fatang's words are
irresponsible. Since he has tried to lodge complaints
against me many times, I am forced to strike back.
Everything I have said has a basis for proof and records
for investigation.
This year is the Eighty Fifth Founding Anniversary of
the Party and the seventieth anniversary since the victory
of the Red Army's Long March. Chairman Mao said:
“When the Red Army was climbing the snow mountains
and passing through the grassy swamps, the Tibetans'
yaks and tsampa also saved the Red Army, [they] have
contributed to the Chinese Revolution.” Especially what
is historically significant is that, with the help of
Commander-in-Chief Zhu, the Karze “Tibetan
Authority" was also established, spreading revolutionary
seeds in the entire Tibetan region. General He Long had
once also passed around Donglong mountain in Bathang
which is the hometown of the “Bathang Underground
Party” and the “Democratic Youth Alliance of Eastern
Tibet” where the five-star flag of the People's Republic
of China, that symbolises the equality and unity of the



124
Witness to Tibet's History
nationalities, was flown high for the first time. This
revolutionary hometown cultivated more than a hundred
young intellectuals who in the 1950s became the main
pillar of newborn nationality revolutionary cadres in Tibet
and Kham regions, effectively playing a very important
role in history. The Party organisations and departments
- especially the Propaganda Department - should not
allow anybody to downplay this; on the contrary energetic
support should be given to propagate the historical
achievements of the “Bathang Underground Party" and
the “Democratic Youth Alliance of Eastern Tibet” so
as to educate the future generations and encourage them
to advance dauntlessly.
Comrade Jintao, a single matchstick is enough for the
arsonist, but putting out the fire would take a great effort.
My letter is a bit long, for which I beg your pardon. It is
surely worthwhile as reference for the Central
Government's consideration in their handling of the
Tibet issue – the most vital item in the nationality work.
Wishing you health and happiness, Tashi Delek!
Phuntsok Wangyal (Phunwang)
1 August 2006



Footnotes
1 In the first volume of Deng Xiaoping Wen Xuan (Collected
Works of Deng Xiaoping], he writes: "Eastern Kham region
is the place that first went for the Nationalities' Autonomy in
the southwest regions, for it has all the conditions. Here there
is a progressive organisation called the Democratic Youth
Alliance of Eastern Tibet'. And when the PLA was passing
through this region this organisation did many effective things.”
In the “Report by Deng Xiaoping to the Politburo on the
Nationality's Work in the Southwestern Region”, comrade
Xiaoping set an example saying: “In the Eastern Kham region,
the organisation that Phuntsok Wangyal leads is called the
“Democratic Youth Alliance of Eastern Tibet” and it is a
progressive organisation which is deliberating on how to abolish
the Old System, and even how to carry out land reform and
socialism..."
2 According to the statistics of relevant departments, among
the Party members of Bathang Underground Party and its
federated members, six of them were later promoted to
Provincial Level (three becoming vice secretaries of the TAR
Party Committee, two above Provincial Level), almost fifty
to above Local Prefecture Level, one hundred and twenty to
County Level and a large number became ordinary cadres.
3 After 1940 we translated the Internationale, March of the
Volunteers (today's national anthem) and the Song of the Guerrillas,
etc., into Tibetan. The basic theme of the song of the
“Democratic Youth Alliance of Eastern Tibet” is based on
the song of the “United Tibetan Federation for Liberty” which
was set up in 1943, with the main tune following the songs of
the American Civil War with lyrics like: “Stand up! Stand up!
Stand up! Our Tibetan brothers are suffering, It is time to



126
struggle, How can we be sound asleep? Corrupt power politics
and bureaucratic rule, Can no longer be borne. Stand up! Stand
up! Those who have no Freedom, Stand up! Be closely united,
Freedom and Equality must be achieved, We struggle for the
founding of a People's Democratic Government, To bring
happy lives to all the people, To all the people.”
4 In 1980, when comrade Deng Xiaoping was meeting with
the Panchen Lama for the first time, in conclusion he said:
“Thę "Seventy-thousand Word [Petition' written by you is
basically correct, but some parts are not. You are a great patriot,
the handling of your case was a bit severe... but in Phunwang's
case it was absolutely wrong. We have known each other from
as early as 1950. The Central Government wants to arrange
for him to work in the NPC Standing Committee, and to be
in charge of high-level work there.” In addition to distributing
the transcript of this talk to comrades in the Politburo, copies
were also given to me and to the Panchen Lama.



A Short Biography
The salutation “May you live in Interesting Times”
could have been coined to envisage the extraordinary
life of Baba Phuntsok Wangyal. To have been born one
year after the Communist Party of China was founded,
in 1921, to a Tibetan family of resistance fighters gave
him the blessing of destiny. To have been raised in the
· borderlands of China and Tibet, where social interaction,
bi-lingual skills and a more sophisticated worldview were
his birthright, gave young Phuntsok Wangyal a rare
opportunity to think and strive beyond the confines of
his fellow countrymen.
His hometown in the province of Bathang, Kham, had a
long history of resistance and bloody uprisings. The very
year before his birth, in 1922, all the buildings on their
family estate were burned to ash in a reprisal for them
hosting the leaders of an armed insurrection against Han
Chinese officials and warlords - then running rampant in
the unruly Sino-Tibetan border regions. After primary
schooling there an uncle, who had been exiled for leading
a failed uprising to establish “national autonomy" for
Kham, took him to Nanjing in south-western China for
higher education. The Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs
Commission college where he studied groomed the so-
called “minorities of China” to become employees of the
Kuomintang government. Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek
himself was President of the college. Then, by 1934, with
the outbreak of the Sino-Japanese War the institution was
moved to Chongqing.
It was here, at the temporary capital of Nationalist
China, that Phuntsok Wangyal began to read the current



128
1
political thinking - including Mao Zedong, Stalin, Marx
and Lenin. So by his mid-teens the revolutionary-to-be
was memorising Lenin's Concerning a Nationality's Right
of Self-Determination and understanding its relevance to
the Constitution of China's Communist Party. This policy
had been drawn up in 1936 by Marshall Zhu De,
Commander-in-Chief of the People's Liberation Army,
during The Long March when he helped set up the anti-
Nationalist “Tibetan Authority” in Karze - a strategic
town in northern Kham.
And so by 1939 the seventeen-year-old Phuntsok
Wangyal was already mobilising the clandestine Tibetan
Communist Revolutionary Group among students in his
college and writing laudatory letters to Stalin and Mao
Zedong. When his activities were discovered he was
scolded and expelled by none other than Chiang Kai-
shek. His star was on the rise.
The young revolutionaries then attempted to make
contact with the Communist Parties of the Soviet Union
and China, receiving some recognition and financial
support from Russian embassy officials, but it was not
until the winter of 1940 that they met Zhou Enlai in
Chongqing and the door to the leadership of the Chinese
Communist Party's Eighth Route Army opened to them.
At eighteen Phuntsok Wangyal was a known figure
among the inner circles and already a "comrade”.
Upon official advice his group returned to Eastern Tibet
to sow the seeds of “revolutionary truth” by circulating
banned Communist literature from Chamdo in the east
to Lhasa - the capital of Tibet in the central province.
By the summer of 1943 Phuntsok Wangyal had met and



129
befriended the aristocratic Governor of Chamdo, Yuthok
Tashi Dhondup, and within months he was in Lhasa,
debating his ideology with the more liberal among the
elite. But within a year the young Khampa comrades had
decided that bringing about reform in the conservative
Tibetan Government was an unlikely outcome of their
nationalistic campaign so they turned to India and the
indigenous Communist Party. In Calcutta Phuntsok
Wangyal interacted with today's nonagenarian eminence
rise of the Communist Party of India (the CPI), Jyoti
Basu, and remained in constant communication with him
between 1944 and 1949. During those years he and his
group carried out revolutionary activities in Lhasa,
Chamdo, Bathang, extending northwest into Yunnan
province and forming new organisations.
With the PLA sweeping to victory in 1949, and the
founding of the People's Republic of China on 1 October
the Tibetan authorities turned their suspicions on
Phuntsok Wangyal and his underground work in Lhasa
and he was deported on suspicion of being a member of
the newly-victorious Communist Party. “Lhasa does not
belong to you small number of power-holding
aristocrats”, he challenged his accusers. “It belongs to
all the people. Today you can force me to leave. But
tomorrow I will return ...”
His return in September 1951 was as the only Tibetan
in the advance contingent of the People's Liberation
Army which marched into Lhasa to "liberate” Tibet from
foreign reactionaries. He was by then deputy-secretary
of the Party Committee in the southern branch of the
PLA's Eighteenth Army and had been holding meetings
with Deng Xiaoping, Liu Bocheng, He Long and Wang



130
Weizhou under the instructions of Marshall Zhu De.
More significantly in the theatre of twentieth century
history, it was Baba Phuntsok Wangyal who was sent by
the Southwest Bureau of the Central Party Committee
to Beijing in 1951 as political interpreter with the Tibetan
delegation to negotiate the “Seventeen-Point Agreement"
which signed away the independence of Tibet. Here he
took on his role as a key witness to Tibet's history.
Back in Lhasa he assumed many positions of power,
including his appointment as a member of the Tibet Work
Committee of the CPC, and in 1953 he led a Tibetan
Buddhist delegation to Beijing for the founding of the
Buddhist Association of China. He was working in Beijing
when the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama arrived in
1954 to attend the first National People's Congress of
the PRC and was chosen to accompany the Dalai Lama
and his entourage on an extensive tour of China, serving
as His Holiness' interpreter.
The closeness and trust created between the Dalai Lama
and Baba Phuntsok Wangyal during this tour would
continue throughout the period until 1958 while he
served as the only Tibetan on the Tibet Work Committee.
Their discussions, Phuntsok Wangyal remembers, were
always candid despite their very different points of view:
"We were both aiming for the prosperity and happiness
of Tibetans”. During those years he was to translate
correspondence between Mao Zedong and the Dalai
Lama and interpret during discussions which the Chinese
leadership held with the Dalai Lama, giving the young
Tibetan leader analyses and personal interpretations of
unfolding events.



131
But by 1958 - as the anti-rightist “rectification
movement” of the Great Leap Forward gained
momentum within China - Baba Phuntsok Wangyal's
star began to wane. His outspoken criticism of Han
nationalism and discrimination against minorities made
him a target of Mao Zedong's leftists and his demotion
left him as a lowly academic back in Beijing.
simultaneously undergoing self-criticism.
With the Tibetan Uprising in Lhasa in March 1959, and
the Dalai Lama's highly-publicised arrival in India as a
refugee, Phuntsok Wangyal came under increasing
official suspicion until, in 1960, he was placed in solitary
confinement in Lhasa's Qincheng Number One Prison
He was thirty eight when the cell door closed on him
and fifty six when he was released. Although he was then
rehabilitated within Beijing's political circles, the years
in prison had turned him to reading, studies and writing
producing a flow of poems, book manuscripts and
theoretical papers in scholarly Hanyu Pinyin Chinese.
The most remarkable achievement of his life is perhaps
his writing career and the erudition displayed in his three
published books: New Investigations into Dialectics (1990);
Liquid Water Does Exist on the Moon (1994) and New
Investigations Into Natural Dialectics (1996).
After the demise of the Tenth Panchen Lama in
January 1989, Baba Phuntsok Wangyal walked away
from his political roles and turned to an academic career
and further writing. Today, at eighty five, he is a
professor and tutor at Beijing's prestigious Chinese
Academy of Social Sciences - the first Tibetan doctoral
tutor of philosophy in China. He has also assumed a
role as elder statesman-philosopher among the



132
intellectual youth in Beijing, and serves as a director,
consultant and standing member of many Chinese
societies and institutes.
In 1990 he and his second wife, who assists in his
research, built a small house in Lhasa – "city of their
dreams, rooted in their souls” – where they plan to settle
one day.
